Addison-Wesley Professional Computing Series 
Brian W. Kernighan, Consulting Editor 
Ken Arnold/John Peyton, A C User's Guide to ANSI C 
David R. Butenhof, Programming with POSIX' Threads 
Tom Cargill, C++ Programming Style 
William R. Cheswick/Steven M. Bellovin, Firewalls and Internet Security: Repelling the Wily Hacker 
David A. Curry, UNIX? System Security: A Guide for Users and System Administrators 
Erich Gamma/Richard Helm/Ralph Johnson/John Vlissides, Design Patterns: Elements of 
Reusable Object-Oriented Software 
Erich Gamma/Richard Helm/Ralph Johnson/John Vlissides, Design Patterns CD: Elements of 
Reusable Object-Oriented Software 
David R. Hanson, C Interfaces and Implementations: Techniques for Creating Reusable Software 
S. Keshav, An Engineering Approach to Computer Networking: ATM Networks, The Internet, and 
the Telephone Network 
John Lakos, Large-Scale C++ Software Design 
Scott Meyers, Effective C++, Second Edition: 50 Specific Ways to Improve Your Programs and Designs 
Scott Meyers, More Effective C++: 35 New Ways to Improve Your Programs and Designs 
Robert B. Murray, C++ Strategies and Tactics 
David R. Musser/Atul Saini, STL Tutorial and Reference Guide: C++ Programming with the 
Standard Template Library 
John K. Ousterhout, Tel and the Tk Toolkit 
Craig Partridge, Gigabit Networking 
J. Stephen Pendergrast Jr., Desktop KornShell Graphical Programming 
Radia Perlman, Interconnections: Bridges and Routers 
David M. Piscitello/A. Lyman Chapin, Open Systems Networking: TCP/IP and OSI 
Stephen A. Rago, UNIX? System V Network Programming 
Curt Schimmel, UNIX? Systems for Modern Architectures: Symmetric Multiprocessing and 
Caching for Kernel Programmers 
W. Richard Stevens, Advanced Programming in the UNIX? Environment 
W. Richard Stevens, TCP/IP Illustrated, Volume I: The Protocols 
W. Richard Stevens, TCP/IP Illustrated, Volume 3: TCP for Transactions, HTTP, AWT? .;?:.; ::::- 
UNIX@ Domain Protocols 
Gary R. Wright/W. Richard Stevens, TCP/IP Illustrated, Volume 2: The ImplemeK::.:::--. 
Programming 
with 
POSIX? Threads 
David R. Butenhof 
A 
?T 
ADDISON-WESLEY 
An Imprint of Addison Wesley Longman, Inc. 
Reading, Massachusetts ? Harlow, England ? Menlo Park, California 
Berkeley, California ? Don Mills, Ontario ? Sydney 
Bonn ? Amsterdam ? Tokyo ? Mexico City 
Trademark acknowledgments: 
UNIX is a registered trademark in the United States and other countries, licensed ex- 
clusively through X/Open Company Ltd. Digital, DEC, Digital UNIX, DECthreads, 
VMS, and OpenVMS are trademarks of Digital Equipment Corporation. Solaris, 
SPARC, SunOS, and Sun are trademarks of Sun Microsystems Incorporated. SGI and 
IRIX are trademarks of Silicon Graphics, Incorporated. HP-UX is a trademark of 
Hewlett-Packard Company. AIX, IBM, and OS/2 are trademarks or registered trade- 
marks of the IBM Corporation. X/Open is a trademark of X/Open Company Ltd. POSIX 
is a registered trademark of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. 
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their prod- 
ucts are claimed as trademarks. Where those designations appear in this book and 
Addison-Wesley was aware of a trademark claim, the designations have been printed 
in initial caps or all caps. 
The authors and publishers have taken care in the preparation of this book, but make 
no expressed or implied warranty of any kind and assume no responsibility for errors 
or omissions. No liability is assumed for incidental or consequential damages in con- 
nection with or arising out of the use of the information or programs contained herein. 
The publisher offers discounts on this book when ordered in quantity for special sales. 
For more information, please contact: 
Corporate & Professional Publishing Group 
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company 
One Jacob Way 
Reading, Massachusetts 01867 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Butenhof, David R., 1956- 
Programming with POSIX threads / David R. Butenhof. 
p. cm. ！ (Addison-Wesley professional computing series) 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 0-201-63392-2 (pbk.) 
1. Threads (Computer programs) 2. POSIX (Computer software 
standard) 3. Electronic digital computers！Programming. I. Title. 
II. Series. 
QA76.76.T55B88 1997 
005.4'32-dc21 97-6635 
CIP 
Copyright ? 1997 by Addison Wesley Longman, Inc. 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted, in any form, or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photo- 
copying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior consent of the publisher. Printed in 
the United States of America. Published simultaneously in Canada. 
Text printed on recycled and acid-free paper. 
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 MA 00 99 98 97 
2nd Printing October, 1997 
To Anne, Amy, 
and 
Alyssa. 
American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language: page 1. 
ISO/IEC 9945-1:1996, ? 1996 by IEEE: page 29. 
Lewis Carroll, Alice's Adventures in Wonderland pages xv, 47, 70, 88, 97, 98, 106, 131, 
142, 161, 189, 197. Reproduced by permission of Macmillan Children's Books. 
Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking-Glass: pages 1, 4, 8, 20, 25, 29, 35, 45, 172, 214, 
241, 283, 290, 302. Reproduced by permission of Macmillan Children's Books. 
Lewis Carroll, The Hunting of the Snarfc pages 3, 13, 28, 39, 120, 131, 134, 289, 367. 
Reproduced by permission of Macmillan Children's Books. 
Contents 
List of Example Programs xii 
Preface xv 
Intended audience xvi 
About the author xvi 
Acknowledgments xvii 
1 Introduction 1 
1.1 The "bailing programmers" 3 
1.2 Definitions and terminology 4 
1.2.1 Asynchronous 4 
1.2.2 Concurrency 4 
1.2.3 Uniprocessor and multiprocessor 5 
1.2.4 Parallelism 5 
1.2.5 Thread safety and reentrancy 6 
1.2.6 Concurrency control functions 7 
1.3 Asynchronous programming is intuitive 8 
1.3.1 ... because UNIX is asynchronous 9 
1.3.2 . . . because the world is asynchronous 11 
1.4 About the examples in this book 12 
1.5 Asynchronous programming, by example 13 
1.5.1 The baseline, synchronous version 14 
1.5.2 Aversion using multiple processes 15 
1.5.3 Aversion using multiple threads 17 
1.5.4 Summary 19 
1.6 Benefits of threading 20 
1.6.1 Parallelism 20 
1.6.2 Concurrency 22 
1.6.3 Programming model 24 
1.7 Costs of threading 25 
1.7.1 Computing overhead 26 
1.7.2 Programming discipline 26 
1.7.3 Harder to debug 27 
1.8 To thread or not to thread? 28 
1.9 POSIX thread concepts 29 
1.9.1 Architectural overview 30 
1.9.2 Types and interfaces 30 
vii 
viii Contents 
1.9.3 Checking for errors 31 
2 Threads 35 
2.1 Creating and using threads 35 
2.2 The life of a thread 39 
2.2.1 Creation 40 
2.2.2 Startup 41 
2.2.3 Running and blocking 42 
2.2.4 Termination 43 
2.2.5 Recycling 44 
3 Synchronization 45 
3.1 Invariants, critical sections, and predicates 45 
3.2 Mutexes 47 
3.2.1 Creating and destroying a mutex 49 
3.2.2 Locking and unlocking a mutex 52 
3.2.2.1 Nonblocking mutex locks 58 
3.2.3 Using mutexes for atomicity 61 
3.2.4 Sizing a mutex to fit the job 62 
3.2.5 Using more than one mutex 63 
3.2.5.1 Lock hierarchy 63 
3.2.5.2 Lock chaining 70 
3.3 Condition variables 70 
3.3.1 Creating and destroying a condition variable 74 
3.3.2 Waiting on a condition variable 77 
3.3.3 Waking condition variable waiters 81 
3.3.4 One final alarm program 82 
3.4 Memory visibility between threads 88 
4 A few ways to use threads 97 
4.1 Pipeline 98 
4.2 Work Crew 106 
4.3 Client/Server 120 
5 Advanced threaded programming 131 
5.1 One-time initialization 131 
5.2 Attributes objects 134 
5.2.1 Mutex attributes 135 
5.2.2 Condition variable attributes 137 
5.2.3 Thread attributes 138 
5.3 Cancellation 142 
5.3.1 Deferred cancelability 147 
5.3.2 Asynchronous cancelability 150 
Contents ix 
5.3.3 Cleaning up 154 
5.4 Thread-specific data 161 
5.4.1 Creating thread-specific data 163 
5.4.2 Using thread-specific data 166 
5.4.3 Using destructor functions 167 
5.5 Realtime scheduling 172 
5.5.1 POSIX realtime options 173 
5.5.2 Scheduling policies and priorities 174 
5.5.3 Contention scope and allocation domain 181 
5.5.4 Problems with realtime scheduling 183 
5.5.5 Priority-aware mutexes 185 
5.5.5.1 Priority ceiling mutexes 186 
5.5.5.2 Priority inheritance mutexes 188 
5.6 Threads and kernel entities 189 
5.6.1 Many-to-one (user level). 190 
5.6.2 One-to-one (kernel level) 191 
5.6.3 Many-to-few (two level) 193 
6 POSIX adjusts to threads 197 
6.1 fork 197 
6.1.1 Fork handlers 199 
6.2 exec 204 
6.3 Process exit 204 
6.4 Stdto 204 
6.4.1 flockfile and funlockffle 205 
6.4.2 getchar_unlocked and putchar_unlocked 207 
6.5 Thread-safe junctions 209 
6.5.1 User and terminal identification 210 
6.5.2 Directory searching 212 
6.5.3 String token 212 
6.5.4 Time representation 212 
6.5.5 Random number generation 213 
6.5.6 Group and user database 213 
6.6 Signals 214 
6.6.1 Signal actions 215 
6.6.2 Signal masks 216 
6.6.3 pthreadjkill 217 
6.6.4 sigwait and sigwaitinfo 227 
6.6.5 SIGEV_THREAD 230 
6.6.6 Semaphores: synchronizing with a 
signal-catching function 234 
7 "Real code" 241 
Contents 
7.1 Extended synchronization 241 
7.1.1 Barriers 242 
7.1.2 Read-write locks 253 
7.2 Work queue manager 270 
7.3 But what about existing libraries? 283 
7.3.1 Modifying libraries to be thread-safe 284 
7.3.2 Living with legacy libraries 285 
8 Hints to avoid debugging 289 
8.1 Avoiding incorrect code 290 
8.1.1 Avoid relying on "thread inertia" 291 
8.1.2 Never bet your mortgage on a thread race 293 
8.1.3 Cooperate to avoid deadlocks 297 
8.1.4 Beware of priority inversion 299 
8.1.5 Never share condition variables between 
predicates 300 
8.1.6 Sharing stacks and related memory 
corrupters 301 
8.2 Avoiding performance problems 302 
8.2.1 Beware of concurrent serialization 302 
8.2.2 Use the right number of mutexes 303 
8.2.2.1 Too many mutexes will not help 304 
8.2.3 Never fight over cache lines 304 
9 POSIX threads mini-reference 307 
9.1 POSIX 1003.1c-1995 options 307 
9.2 POSIX 1003.1c-1995 limits 308 
9.3 POSIX 1003.1c-1995 interfaces 309 
9.3.1 Error detection and reporting 310 
9.3.2 Use of void* type 311 
9.3.3 Threads 311 
9.3.4 Mutexes 316 
9.3.5 Condition variables 319 
9.3.6 Cancellation 323 
9.3.7 Thread-specific data 325 
9.3.8 Realtime scheduling 326 
9.3.9 Fork handlers 336 
9.3.10 Stdio 336 
9.3.11 Thread-safe functions 338 
9.3.12 Signals 342 
9.3.13 Semaphores 345 
10 Future standardization 347 
10.1 X/OpenXSH5 [UNIX98] 347 
Contents 
10.1.1 POSIX options for XSH5 348 
10.1.2 Mutex type 349 
10.1.3 Set concurrency level 351 
10.1.4 Stack guard size 353 
10.1.5 Parallel I/O 354 
10.1.6 Cancellation points 355 
10.2 POSIX 1003.1J 356 
10.2.1 Barriers 358 
10.2.2 Read-write locks 358 
10.2.3 Spinlocks 359 
10.2.4 Condition variable wait clock 359 
10.2.5 Thread abort 361 
10.3 POSIX 1003.14 361 
Bibliography 363 
Thread resources on the Internet 367 
Index 369 
Example programs 
sample.c part 1 sample info 13 
alarm.c 14 
alarm_fork.c 15 
alarm_thread.c part 1 definitions 17 
alarm_thread.c part 2 alarm_thread 18 
alarm_thread.c part 3 main 18 
thread_error.c 32 
errors . h 33 
lifecycle.c 38 
mutex_static .c 50 
mutex_dynamic.c 50 
alarm_mutex. c part 1 definitions 52 
alarm_mutex.c part 2 alarm_thread 54 
alarm_mutex.c part 3 main 56 
trylock.c 59 
backoff .c 66 
cond_static.c 74 
cond_dynamic . c 75 
cond.c 78 
alarm_cond.c part 1 declarations 83 
alarm_cond.c part 2 alarm_insert 84 
alarm_cond.c part 3 alarm_routine 86 
alarm_cond.c part 4 main 87 
pipe.c part 1 definitions 99 
pipe.c part 2 pipe_send 100 
pipe.c part 3 pipe_stage 101 
pipe.c part 4 pipe_create 102 
pipe.c part 5 pipe_start, pipe_result 104 
pipe.c part 6 main 105 
crew.c part 1 definitions 108 
crew.c part 2 worker_routine 110 
crew.c part 3 crew_create 115 
crew.c part 4 crew_start 117 
crew.c part 5 main 119 
server.c part 1 definitions 121 
server.c part 2 tty_server_routine 123 
server.c part 3 tty_server_request 125 
server.c part 4 client_routine 127 
xii 
Example programs xiii 
server.c part 5 main 129 
once.c 133 
mutex_attr.c , 136 
cond_attr.c 137 
thread_attr. c 140 
cancel.c 145 
cancel_disable.c 149 
cancel_async .c 152 
cancel_cleanup.c 156 
cancel_subcontract.c 158 
tsd_onee.c 164 
tsd_destrttctor.c 169 
sched_attr .c 176 
sched_thread.c 179 
atfork.c 201 
flock.c 205 
putchar.c 208 
getlogin.c 211 
susp.c part 1 signal-catchingfunctions 218 
susp.c part 2 initialization 220 
susp.c part 3 thd_suspend 221 
susp.c part 4 thd_continue 223 
susp.c part 5 sampleprogram 225 
sigwait.c 228 
sigev_thread.c 232 
semaphore_signal.c 238 
barrier.h part 1 barrier t 245 
barrier.h part 2 interfaces 245 
barrier.c part 1 barrier_init 246 
barrier.c part 2 barrier_destroy 247 
barrier.c part 3 barrier_wait 250 
barrier_main. c 251 
rwlock.h part 1 rwlock_t . 255 
rwlock.h part 2 interfaces 257 
rwlock.c part 1 rwl_init 257 
rwlock.c part 2 rwl_destroy 259 
rwlock.c part 3 cleanup handlers 260 
rwlock.c part 4 rwl_readlock 261 
rwlock.c part 5 rwl_readtrylock 262 
rwlock. c part 6 rwl readunlock 263 
rwlock.c part 7 rwl_writelock 263 
rwlock.c part 8 rwl_writetrylock 264 
rwlock.c part 9 rwl_writeunlock 265 
rwlock_main. c 266 
workq. h part 1 workq_t 271 
ariv Example programs 
workq.h part 2 interfaces 272 
workq.c part 1 workq_init 272 
workq.c part 2 workq_destroy 274 
workq.c part 3 workq_add 275 
workq.c part 4 workq_server 277 
workq_main.c 280 
inertia, c 291 
Preface 
The White Rabbit put on his spectacles, 
"Where shall I begin, please your Majesty?" he asked. 
"Begin at the beginning," the King said, very gravely, 
"and go on till you come to the end: then stop." 
！Lewis Carroll, Alice's Adventures in Wonderland 
This book is about "threads" and how to use them. "Thread" is just a name for 
a basic software "thing" that can do work on a computer. A thread is smaller, 
faster, and more maneuverable than a traditional process. In fact, once threads 
have been added to an operating system, a "process" becomes just data！address 
space, files, and so forth！plus one or more threads that do something with all 
that data. 
With threads, you can build applications that utilize system resources more 
efficiently, that are more friendly to users, that run blazingly fast on multiproces- 
sors, and that may even be easier to maintain. To accomplish all this, you need 
only add some relatively simple function calls to your code, adjust to a new way of 
thinking about programming, and leap over a few yawning chasms. Reading this 
book carefully will, I hope, help you to accomplish all that without losing your 
sense of humor. 
The threads model used in this book is commonly called "Pthreads," or 
"POSIX threads." Or, more formally (since you haven't yet been properly intro- 
duced), the POSIX 1003. lc-1995 standard. I'll give you a few other names later！ 
but for now, "Pthreads" is all you need to worry about. 
As I write this, Sun's Solaris, Digital's Digital UNIX, and SGI's IRIX already 
support Pthreads. The other major commercial UNIX operating systems will soon 
have Pthreads as well, maybe even by the time you read this, including IBM's AIX 
and Hewlett-Packard's HP-UX. Pthreads implementations are also available for 
Linux and other UNIX operating systems. 
In the personal computer market, Microsoft's Win32 API (the primary pro- 
gramming interface to both Windows NT and Windows 95) supports threaded 
programming, as does IBM's OS/2. These threaded programming models are 
quite different from Pthreads, but the important first step toward using them pro- 
ductively is understanding concurrency, synchronization, and scheduling. The 
rest is (more or less) a matter of syntax and style, and an experienced thread pro- 
grammer can adapt to any of these models. 
xv 
xvi Preface 
The threaded model can be (and has been) applied with great success to a 
wide range of programming problems. Here are just a few: 
? Large scale, computationally intensive programs 
? High-performance application programs and library code that can take 
advantage of multiprocessor systems 
? Library code that can be used by threaded application programs 
? Realtime application programs and library code 
? Application programs and library code that perform I/O to slow external 
devices (such as networks and human beings). 
Intended audience 
This book assumes that you are an experienced programmer, familiar with 
developing code for an operating system in "the UNIX family" using the ANSI C 
language. I have tried not to assume that you have any experience with threads 
or other forms of asynchronous programming. The Introduction chapter provides 
a general overview of the terms and concepts you'll need for the rest of the book. 
If you don't want to read the Introduction first, that's fine, but if you ever feel like 
you're "missing something" you might try skipping back to get introduced. 
Along the way you'll find examples and simple analogies for everything. In the 
end I hope that you'll be able to continue comfortably threading along on your 
own. Have fun, and "happy threading." 
About the author 
I have been involved in the Pthreads standard since it began, although I 
stayed at home for the first few meetings. I was finally forced to spend a grueling 
week in the avalanche-proof concrete bunker at the base of Snowbird ski resort 
in Utah, watching hard-working standards representatives from around the 
world wax their skis. This was very distracting, because I had expected a stan- 
dards meeting to be a formal and stuffy environment. As a result of this 
misunderstanding, I was forced to rent ski equipment instead of using my own. 
After the Pthreads standard went into balloting, I worked on additional thread 
synchronization interfaces and multiprocessor issues with several POSIX work- 
ing groups. I also helped to define the Aspen threads extensions, which were fast- 
tracked into X/Open XSH5. 
I have worked at Digital Equipment Corporation for (mumble, mumble) years, 
in various locations throughout Massachusetts and New Hampshire. I was one of 
the creators of Digital's own threading architecture, and I designed (and imple- 
mented much of) the Pthreads interfaces on Digital UNIX 4.0. I have been helping 
people develop and debug threaded code for more than eight years. 
Preface xvii 
My unofficial motto is "Better Living Through Concurrency." Threads are not 
sliced bread, but then, we're programmers, not bakers, so we do what we can. 
Acknowledgments 
This is the part where I write the stuff that I'd like to see printed, and that my 
friends and coworkers want to see. You probably don't care, and I promise not to 
be annoyed if you skip over it！but if you're curious, by all means read on. 
No project such as this book can truly be accomplished by a single person, 
despite the fact that only one name appears on the cover. I could have written a 
book about threads without any help！I know a great deal about threads, and I 
am at least reasonably competent at written communication. However, the result 
would not have been this book, and this book is better than that hypothetical 
work could possibly have been. 
Thanks first and foremost to my manager Jean Fullerton, who gave me the 
time and encouragement to write this book on the job！and thanks to the rest of 
the DECthreads team who kept things going while I wrote, including Brian 
Keane, Webb Scales, Jacqueline Berg, Richard Love, Peter Portante, Brian Silver, 
Mark Simons, and Steve Johnson. 
Thanks to Garret Swart who, while he was with Digital at the Systems 
Research Center, got us involved with POSIX. Thanks to Nawaf Bitar who worked 
with Garret to create, literally overnight, the first draft of what became Pthreads, 
and who became POSIX thread evangelist through the difficult period of getting 
everyone to understand just what the heck this threading thing was all about 
anyway. Without Garret, and especially Nawaf, Pthreads might not exist, and cer- 
tainly wouldn't be as good as it is. (The lack of perfection is not their 
responsibility！that's the way life is.) 
Thanks to everyone who contributed to the design of cma, Pthreads, UNIX98, 
and to the users of DCE threads and DECthreads, for all the help, thought-pro- 
voking discourse, and assorted skin-thickening exercises, including Andrew 
Birrell, Paul Borman, Bob Conti, Bill Cox, Jeff Denham, Peter Gilbert, Rick Greer, 
Mike Grier, Kevin Harris, Ken Hobday, Mike Jones, Steve Kleiman, Bob Knighten, 
Leslie Lamport, Doug Locke, Paula Long, Finnbarr P. Murphy, Bill Noyce, Simon 
Patience, Harold Seigel, Al Simons, Jim Woodward, and John Zolnowsky. 
Many thanks to all those who patiently reviewed the drafts of this book (and 
even to those who didn't seem so patient at times). Brian Kernighan, Rich Stevens, 
Dave Brownell, Bill Gallmeister, Ilan Ginzburg, Will Morse, Bryan O'Sullivan, Bob 
Robillard, Dave Ruddock, Bil Lewis, and many others suggested or motivated 
improvements in structure and detail！and provided additional skin-thickening 
exercises to keep me in shape. Devang Shah and Bart Smaalders answered some 
Solaris questions, and Bryan O'Sullivan suggested what became the "bailing pro- 
grammers" analogy. 
xviii Preface 
Thanks to John Wait and Lana Langlois at Addison Wesley Longman, who 
waited with great patience as a first-time writer struggled to balance writing a 
book with engineering and consulting commitments. Thanks to Pamela Yee and 
Erin Sweeney, who managed the book's production process, and to all the team 
(many of whose names I'll never know), who helped. 
Thanks to my wife, Anne Lederhos, and our daughters Amy and Alyssa, for all 
the things for which any writers may thank their families, including support, tol- 
erance, and just being there. And thanks to Charles Dodgson (Lewis Carroll), who 
wrote extensively about threaded programming (and nearly everything else) in his 
classic works Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, Through the Looking-Glass, and 
The Hunting of the Snark. 
Dave Butenhof 
Digital Equipment Corporation 
110 Spit Brook Road, ZKO2-3/Q18 
Nashua, NH 03062 
butenhof@zko. dec. com 
December 1996 
1 Introduction 
'The time has come," the Walrus said, 
"To talk of many things; 
Of shoes！and ships！and sealing wax！ 
Of cabbages！and kings！ 
And why the sea is boiling hot！ 
And whether pigs have wings." 
！Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking-Glass 
In a dictionary, you would probably see that one of several definitions for 
"thread" is along the lines of the third definition in the American Heritage paper- 
back dictionary on my desk: "Anything suggestive of the continuousness and 
sequence of thread." In computer terms, a thread is the set of properties that sug- 
gest "continuousness and sequence" within the machine. A thread comprises the 
machine state necessary to execute a sequence of machine instructions！the loca- 
tion of the current instruction, the machine's address and data registers, and so 
forth. 
A UNIX process can be thought of as a thread, plus an address space, file 
descriptors, and an assortment of other data. Some versions of UNIX support 
"lightweight" or "variable weight" processes that allow you to strip some or all of 
that data from some of your processes for efficiency. Now, whether you're using a 
"thread" or a "lightweight process," you still need the address space, file descrip- 
tors, and everything else. So, you might ask, what's the point? The point is that 
you can have many threads sharing an address space, doing different things. On 
a multiprocessor, the threads in a process can be doing different things 
simultaneously. 
When computers lived in glass caves and were fed carefully prepared punch 
cards, the real world outside could be kept waiting with no consequences more 
severe than some grumbling programmers. But the real world doesn't do one 
thing at a time, and gradually computers began to model that world by adding 
capabilities such as multiprogramming, time sharing, multiprocessing, and, even- 
tually, threads. 
Threads can help you bring your application out of the cave, and Pthreads 
helps you do it in a way that will be neat, efficient, and portable. This chapter 
briefly introduces you to what you need to begin understanding and using 
threads. Don't worry！the rest of the book will follow up on the details left dan- 
gling in this chapter. 
Section 1.1 presents the framework for a number of analogies that I will use to 
explain threading as we go. There is nothing all that unusual in the brief story！ 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction 
but hereafter you will understand when I talk about programmers and buckets, 
which, otherwise, might seem mildly odd. 
Section 1.2 defines some essential concepts and terms used in this book. The 
most important of these concepts deserves a special introduction, which will also 
serve to demonstrate the convention with which various particularly important 
points shall be emphasized throughout this book: 
I Asynchronous: 
Any two operations are "asynchronous" when they can proceed 
independently of each other. 
Section 1.3 describes how you already use asynchronous programming on a 
regular basis, both as a UNIX programmer and user, and as a human being in the 
real world. I wouldn't dare to claim that asynchronous programming is easy, but 
the basic concepts it tries to model are so easy and natural that you rarely need 
even to think about them until you try to apply them to software. 
Threads are, to some extent, just one more way to make applications asyn- 
chronous, but threads have some advantages over other models that have been 
used to build asynchronous applications. Section 1.5 will show you some of the 
advantages as we apply various programming methods in several versions of a 
simple alarm clock. You will get to see "threads in action" right away, with a brief 
description of the few Pthreads interfaces needed to build this simple application. 
Armed, now, with a basic understanding of what threads are all about, you 
can go on to Section 1.6, where we will explore some of the fundamental advan- 
tages of a threaded programming model. 
Although there are a lot of excellent reasons to use threads, there is a price to 
be paid. Section 1.7 provides a counterpoint to the previous section by describing 
some of the costs. What it boils down to, though, is simply that you need to learn 
how the model works, and then apply it carefully. It is not as hard as some folks 
would have you believe. 
You have seen some of the fundamental benefits and costs. It may be obvious 
that you do not want to rush out and put threads into every application or library 
you write. Section 1.8 asks the question 'To thread, or not to thread?" and I will 
attempt to guide you toward determining the proper answer in various cases. 
You will know at that point what threads are, what they do, and when to use 
them. Aside from brief examples, you haven't yet seen any detailed information 
about the particular programming interfaces (APIs) that compose Pthreads. Sec- 
tion 1.9 points out some of the basic landmarks of the Pthreads universe to get 
you oriented before we plunge ahead. The most important part of this section is 
1.9.3, which describes the Pthreads model for reporting errors！which is some- 
what different than the rest of UNIX and POSIX. 
The "bailing programmers" 
1.1 The "bailing programmers" 
This was charming, no doubt: but they shortly found out 
That the Captain they trusted so well 
Had only one notion for crossing the ocean, 
And that was to tingle his bell. 
！Lewis Carroll, The Hunting of the Snark 
Three programmers sail out to sea one fine day in a small boat, They sail quite some dis- 
tance from shore, enjoying the sun and sea breeze, allowing the wind to carry them. 
The sky darkens, and a storm strikes. The small boat is tossed violently about, and when 
the storm abates the programmers are missing their boat's sail and most of the mast. The 
boat has sprung a small leak, and there is no land in sight. 
The boat is equipped with food, water, oars, and a bailing bucket, and the pro- 
grammers set to work. One programmer rows, and monitors the accumulating water in 
the bottom of the boat. The other programmers alternately sleep, watch the water 
level, or scan the horizon for sight of land or another ship. 
An idle programmer may notice rising water in the boat, and begin bailing. When 
both idle programmers are awake, and become simultaneously concerned regarding 
their increasing dampness, they may both lunge for the bailing bucket！but one will 
inevitably reach it first, and the other will have to wait. 
If the rower decides that bailing is required while both his companions sleep,a nudge 
is usually sufficient to awaken a programmer, allowing the other to continue sleeping. But 
if the rower is in a bad mood, he may resort to a loud yell, awakening both sleeping pro- 
grammers. While one programmer assumes the necessary duty, the other can try to fall 
asleep again. 
When the rower tires, he can signal one of the other programmers to take over the 
task, and immediately fall into a deep sleep waiting to be signaled in turn. In this way, 
they journey on for some time. 
So, just what do the Bailing Programmers have to do with threads? I'm glad 
you asked! The elements of the story represent analogies that apply to the 
Pthreads programming model. We'll explore some additional analogies in later 
sections, and even expand the story a little, but for now consider a few basics: 
A programmer is an entity that is capable of independent activity. Our pro- 
grammers represent threads. A thread is not really much like a 
programmer, who, as we all know, is a fascinatingly sophisticated mixture 
of engineer, mathematician, and artist that no computer can match. Still, 
as a representation of the "active element" in our programming model, it 
will be sufficient. 
The bailing bucket and the oars are "tokens" that can be held by only one 
individual at a time. They can be thought of as shared data, or as synchro- 
nization objects. The primary Pthreads synchronization object, by the way, 
is called a mutex. 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction 
Nudges and shouts are communication mechanisms associated with a syn- 
chronization object, on which individuals wait for some condition. 
Pthreads provides condition variables, which may be signaled or broadcast 
to indicate changes in shared data state. 
1.2 Definitions and terminology 
"When I use a word," Humpty Dumpty said, in rather a scornful tone, 
"it means just what I choose it to mean！neither more nor less." 
！Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking-Glass 
This book will use several critical terms that may be unfamiliar to you unless 
you've already had some experience with parallel or asynchronous programming. 
Even if you are familiar with them, some of the terms have seen assorted and 
even contradictory uses within research and industry, and that is clearly not 
going to help communication. We need to begin by coming to a mutual agreement 
regarding the meaning of these terms, and, since I am writing the book, we will 
agree to use my definitions. (Thank you.) 
1.2.1 Asynchronous 
Asynchronous means that things happen independently (concurrently) unless 
there's some enforced dependency. Life is asynchronous. The dependencies are 
supplied by nature, and events that are not dependent on one another can occur 
simultaneously. A programmer cannot row without the oars, or bail effectively 
without the bucket！but a programmer with oars can row while another pro- 
grammer with a bucket bails. Traditional computer programming, on the other 
hand, causes all events to occur in series unless the programmer takes "extraor- 
dinary measures" to allow them to happen concurrently. 
The greatest complication of "asynchrony" has been that there's little advan- 
tage to being asynchronous unless you can have more than one activity going at a 
time. If you can start an asynchronous operation, but then you can do nothing 
but wait for it, you're not getting much benefit from the asynchrony. 
1.2.2 Concurrency 
Concurrency, which an English dictionary will tell you refers to things hap- 
pening at the same time, is used to refer to things that appear to happen at the 
same time, but which may occur serially. Concurrency describes the behavior of 
threads or processes on a uniprocessor system. The definition of concurrent 
Definitions and terminology 
execution in POSIX requires that "functions that suspend the execution of the 
calling thread shall not cause the execution of other threads to be indefinitely 
suspended." 
Concurrent operations may be arbitrarily interleaved so that they make 
progress independently (one need not be completed before another begins), but 
concurrency does not imply that the operations proceed simultaneously. Never- 
theless, concurrency allows applications to take advantage of asynchronous 
capabilities, and "do work" while independent operations are proceeding. 
Most programs have asynchronous aspects that may not be immediately obvi- 
ous. Users, for example, prefer asynchronous interfaces. They expect to be able to 
issue a command while they're thinking about it, even before the program has 
finished with the last one. And when a windowing interface provides separate 
windows, don't you intuitively expect those windows to act asynchronously? 
Nobody likes a "busy" cursor. Pthreads provides you with both concurrency and 
asynchrony, and the combination is exactly what you need to easily write respon- 
sive and efficient programs. Your program can "wait in parallel" for slow I/O 
devices, and automatically take advantage of multiprocessor systems to compute 
in parallel. 
1.2.3 Uniprocessor and multiprocessor 
The terms uniprocessor and multiprocessor are fairly straightforward, but let's 
define them just to make sure there's no confusion. By uniprocessor, I mean a 
computer with a single programmer-visible execution unit (processor). A single 
general-purpose processor with superscalar processing, or vector processors, or 
other math or I/O coprocessors is still usually considered a uniprocessor. 
By multiprocessor, I mean a computer with more than one processor sharing a 
common instruction set and access to the same physical memory. While the pro- 
cessors need not have equal access to all physical memory, it should be possible 
for any processor to gain access to most memory. A "massively parallel processor" 
(MPP) may or may not qualify as a multiprocessor for the purposes of this book. 
Many MPP systems do qualify, because they provide access to all physical mem- 
ory from every processor, even though the access times may vary widely. 
1.2.4 Parallelism 
Parallelism describes concurrent sequences that proceed simultaneously. In 
other words, software "parallelism" is the same as English "concurrency" and dif- 
ferent from software "concurrency." Parallelism has a vaguely redeeming analogy 
to the English definition: It refers to things proceeding in the same direction 
independently (without intersection). 
True parallelism can occur only on a multiprocessor system, but concurrency 
can occur on both uniprocessor and multiprocessor systems. Concurrency can 
6 CHAPTER l Introduction 
occur on a uniprocessor because concurrency is, essentially, the illusion of paral- 
lelism. While parallelism requires that a program be able to perform two 
computations at once, concurrency requires only that the programmer be able to 
pretend that two things can happen at once. 
1.2.5 Thread safety and reentrancy 
'Thread-safe" means that the code can be called from multiple threads with- 
out destructive results. It does not require that the code run efficiently in 
multiple threads, only that it can operate safely in multiple threads. Most exist- 
ing functions can be made thread-safe using tools provided by Pthreads！ 
mutexes, condition variables, and thread-specific data. Functions that don't 
require persistent context can be made thread-safe by serializing the entire func- 
tion, for example, by locking a mutex on entry to the function, and unlocking the 
mutex before returning. Functions made thread-safe by serializing the entire 
function can be called in multiple threads！but only one thread can truly perform 
the function at a time. 
More usefully, thread-safe functions can be broken down into smaller critical 
sections. That allows more than one thread to execute within the function, 
although not within the same part. Even better, the code can be redesigned to 
protect critical data rather than critical code, which may allow fully parallel exe- 
cution of the code, when the threads don't need to use the same data at the same 
time. 
The putchar function, for example, which writes a character into a standard 
I/O (stdio) buffer, might be made thread-safe by turning putchar into a critical 
section. That is, putchar might lock a "putchar mutex," write the character, and 
then unlock the putchar mutex. You could call putchar from two threads, and no 
data would be corrupted！it would be thread-safe. However, only one thread 
could write its character at a time, and the others would wait, even if they were 
writing to different stdio streams. 
The correct solution is to associate the mutex with the stream, protecting the 
data rather than the code. Now your threads, as long as they are writing to differ- 
ent streams, can execute putchar in parallel. More importantly, all functions that 
access a stream can use the same mutex to safely coordinate their access to that 
stream. 
The term "reentrant" is sometimes used to mean "efficiently thread-safe." That 
is, the code was made thread-safe by some more sophisticated measures than 
converting the function or library into a single serial region. Although existing 
code can usually be made thread-safe by adding mutexes and thread-specific 
data, it is often necessary to change the interface to make a function reentrant. 
Reentrant code should avoid relying on static data and, ideally, should avoid reli- 
ance on any form of synchronization between threads. 
Often, a function can avoid internal synchronization by saving state in a "con- 
text structure" that is controlled by the caller. The caller is then responsible for 
Definitions and terminology 
any necessary synchronization of the data. The UNIX readdir function, for exam- 
ple, returns each directory entry in sequence. To make readdir thread-safe, you 
might add a mutex that readdir locked each time it was called, and unlocked 
before it returned to the caller. Another approach, as Pthreads has taken with 
readdir_r, is to avoid any locking within the function, letting the caller allocate a 
structure that maintains the context of readdir_r as it searches a directory. 
At first glance, it may seem that we're just making the caller perform what 
ought to be the job of readdir_r. But remember that only the caller knows how 
the data will be used. If only one thread uses this particular directory context, for 
example, then no synchronization is needed. Even when the data is shared 
between threads, the caller may be able to supply more efficient synchronization, 
for example, if the context can be protected using a mutex that the application 
also uses for other data. 
1.2.6 Concurrency control functions 
Any "concurrent system" must provide a core set of essential functions that 
you need to create concurrent execution contexts, and control how they operate 
within your library or application. Here are three essential facilities, or aspects, 
of any concurrent system: 
1. Execution context is the state of a concurrent entity. A concurrent system 
must provide a way to create and delete execution contexts, and maintain 
their state independently. It must be able to save the state of one context 
and dispatch to another at various times, for example, when one needs to 
wait for an external event. It must be able to continue a context from the 
point where it last executed, with the same register contents, at a later 
time. 
2. Scheduling determines which context (or set of contexts) should execute at 
any given point in time, and switches between contexts when necessary. 
3. Synchronization provides mechanisms for concurrent execution contexts to 
coordinate their use of shared resources. We use this term in a way that is 
nearly the opposite of the standard dictionary meaning. You'll find a defini- 
tion much like "cause to occur at the same time," whereas we usually 
mean something that might better be expressed as "prevent from occurring 
at the same time." In a thesaurus, you may find that "cooperate" is a 
synonym for "synchronize"！and synchronization is the mechanism by 
which threads cooperate to accomplish a task. This book will use the term 
"synchronization," though, because that is what you'll see used, almost 
universally. 
There are many ways to provide each of these facilities！but they are always 
present in some form. The particular choices presented in this book are dictated 
by the book's subject！Pthreads. Table 1.1 shows a few examples of the three 
facilities in various systems. 
CHAPTER l Introduction 
Execution context Scheduling Synchronization 
Real traffic 
UNIX 
(before threads) 
Pthreads 
automobile 
process 
thread 
traffic lights and 
signs 
priority (nice) 
policy, priority 
turn signals and brake 
lights 
wait and pipes 
condition variables and 
mutexes 
TABLE 1.1 Execution contexts, schedulers, and synchronization 
A system's scheduling facility may allow each thread to run until it voluntarily 
yields the processor to another thread ("run until block"). It may provide time- 
slicing, where each thread is forced to periodically yield so that other threads may 
run ("round-robin"). It may provide various scheduling policies that allow the 
application to control how each thread is scheduled according to that thread's 
function. It may provide a "class scheduler" where dependencies between threads 
are described so that, for example, the scheduler can ensure that members of a 
tightly coupled parallel algorithm are scheduled at the same time. 
Synchronization may be provided using a wide variety of mechanisms. Some 
of the most common forms are mutexes, condition variables, semaphores, and 
events. You may also use message passing mechanisms, such as UNIX pipes, 
sockets, POSIX message queues, or other protocols for communicating between 
asynchronous processes！on the same system or across a network. Any form of 
communication protocol contains some form of synchronization, because passing 
data around with no synchronization results in chaos, not communication. 
The terms thread, mutex, and condition variable are the main topics of this 
book. For now, it is enough to know that a thread represents an "executable thing" 
on your computer. A mutex provides a mechanism to prevent threads from collid- 
ing unexpectedly, and a condition variable allows a thread, once it has avoided 
such a collision, to wait until it is safe to proceed. Both mutexes and condition 
variables are used to synchronize the operation of threads. 
1.3 Asynchronous programming is intuitive ... 
"In most gardens," the Tiger-lily said, 
"they make the beds too soft！so that the flowers are always asleep.' 
This sounded a very good reason, and Alice was quite 
pleased to know it. 
"I never thought of that before!" she said. 
！Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking-Glass 
If you haven't been involved in traditional realtime programming, asynchro- 
nous programming may seem new and different. But you've probably been using 
Asynchronous programming is intuitive ... 9 
asynchronous programming techniques all along. You've probably used UNIX, for 
example, and, even as a user, the common UNIX shells from sh to ksh have been 
designed for asynchronous programming. You've also been using asynchronous 
"programming" techniques in real life since you were born. 
Most people understand asynchronous behavior much more thoroughly than 
they expect, once they get past the complications of formal and restricted 
definitions. 
1.3.1 ... because UNIX is asynchronous 
In any UNIX system, processes execute asynchronously with respect to each 
other, even when there is only a single processor. Yes, until recently it was diffi- 
cult to write individual programs for UNIX that behaved asynchronously！but 
UNIX has always made it fairly easy for you to behave asynchronously. When you 
type a command to a shell, you are really starting an independent program！if 
you run the program in the background, it runs asynchronously with the shell. 
When you pipe the output of one command to another you are starting several 
independent programs, which synchronize between themselves using the pipe. 
I Time is a synchronization mechanism. 
In many cases you provide synchronization between a series of processes your- 
self, maybe without even thinking about it. For example, you run the compiler 
after you've finished editing the source files. It wouldn't occur to you to compile 
them first, or even at the same time. That's elementary real-life synchronization. 
I UNIX pipes and files can be synchronization mechanisms. 
In other cases you may use more complicated software synchronization mech- 
anisms. When you type "Is | more" to a shell to pass the output of the Is 
command into the more command, you're describing synchronization by specify- 
ing a data dependency. The shell starts both commands right away, but the more 
command can't generate any output until it receives input from Is through the 
pipe. Both commands proceed concurrently (or even in parallel on a multiproces- 
sor) with Is supplying data and more processing that data, independently of each 
other. If the pipe buffer is big enough, Is could complete before more ever started; 
but more can't ever get ahead of Is. 
Some UNIX commands perform synchronization internally. For example, the 
command "cc -o thread thread.c" might involve a number of separate pro- 
cesses. The cc command might be a "front end" to the C language environment, 
which runs a filter to expand preprocessor commands (like #include and #if), a 
compiler to translate the program into an intermediate form, an optimizer to reor- 
der the translation, an assembler to translate the intermediate form into object 
language, and a loader to translate that into an executable binary file. As with 
10 CHAPTER 1 Introduction 
Is | more, all these programs may be running at the same time, with synchroniza- 
tion provided by pipes, or by access to temporary files. 
UNIX processes can operate asynchronously because each process includes 
all the information needed to execute code. The operating system can save the 
state of one process and switch to another without affecting the operation of 
either. Any general-purpose asynchronous "entity" needs enough state to enable 
the operating system to switch between them arbitrarily. But a UNIX process 
includes additional state that is not directly related to "execution context," such 
as an address space and file descriptors. 
A thread is the part of a process that's necessary to execute code. On most 
computers that means each thread has a pointer to the thread's current instruc- 
tion (often called a "PC" or "program counter"), a pointer to the top of the thread's 
stack (SP), general registers, and floating-point or address registers if they are 
kept separate. A thread may have other things, such as processor status and 
coprocessor control registers. A thread does not include most of the rest of the 
state associated with a process; for example, threads do not have their own file 
descriptors or address space. All threads within a process share all of the files 
and memory, including the program text and data segments. 
I Threads are "simpler" than processes. 
You can think of a thread as a sort of "stripped down" process, lean and mean 
and ready to go. The system can switch between two threads within a process 
much faster than it can switch between processes. A large part of this advantage 
comes from the fact that threads within a process share the address space！code, 
data, stack, everything. 
When a processor switches between two processes, all of the hardware state 
for that process becomes invalid. Some may need to be changed as part of the 
context switch procedure！data cache and virtual memory translation entries 
may be flushed, for example. Even when they do not need to be flushed immedi- 
ately, however, the data is not useful to the new process. Each process has a 
separate virtual memory address space, but threads running within the same 
process share the virtual address space and all other process data. 
Threads can make high-bandwidth communication easier between indepen- 
dent parts of your program. You don't have to worry about message passing 
mechanisms like pipes or about keeping shared memory region address refer- 
ences consistent between several different address spaces. Synchronization is 
faster, and programming is much more natural. If you create or open a file, all 
threads can use it. If you allocate a dynamic data structure with malloc, you can 
pass the address to other threads and they can reference it. Threads make it easy 
to take advantage of concurrency. 
Asynchronous programming is intuitive ... 11 
1.3.2 ... because the world is asynchronous 
Thinking asynchronously can seem awkward at first, but it'll become natural 
with a little practice. Start by getting over the unnatural expectation that every- 
thing will happen serially unless you do something "unusual." On a one-lane 
road cars proceed one at a time！but on a two-lane road two cars go at once. You 
can go out for a cup of coffee, leaving your computer compiling some code and 
fully expecting that it will proceed without you. Parallelism happens everywhere 
in the real world, and you expect it. 
A row of cashiers in a store serve customers in parallel; the customers in each 
line generally wait their turn. You can improve throughput by opening more lines, 
as long as there are registers and cashiers to serve them, and enough customers 
to be served by them. Creating two lines for the same register may avoid confu- 
sion by keeping lines shorter！but nobody will get served faster. Opening three 
registers to serve two customers may look good, but it is just a waste of resources. 
In an assembly line, workers perform various parts of the complete job in par- 
allel, passing work down the line. Adding a station to the line may improve 
performance if it parallels or subdivides a step in the assembly that was so com- 
plicated that the operator at the next station spent a lot of time waiting for each 
piece. Beware of improving one step so much that it generates more work than 
the next step on the assembly line can handle. 
In an office, each project may be assigned to a "specialist." Common special- 
ties include marketing, management, engineering, typing pool, sales, support, 
and so forth. Each specialist handles her project independently on behalf of the 
customer or some other specialist, reporting back in some fashion when done. 
Assigning a second specialist to some task, or denning narrower specialties (for 
example, assigning an engineer or manager permanently to one product) may 
improve performance as long as there's enough work to keep her busy. If not, 
some specialists play games while others' in-baskets overflow. 
Motor vehicles move in parallel on a highway. They can move at different 
speeds, pass each other, and enter and exit the highway independently. The driv- 
ers must agree to certain conventions in order to avoid collisions. Despite speed 
limits and traffic signs, compliance with the "rules of the road" is mostly volun- 
tary. Similarly, threads must be coded to "agree" to rules that protect the program, 
or risk ending up undergoing emergency debugging at the thread hospital. 
Software can apply parallelism in the same ways you might use it in real life, 
and for the same reasons. When you have more than one "thing" capable of doing 
work, you naturally expect them to all do work at the same time. A multiproces- 
sor system can perform multiple computations, and any time-sharing system can 
perform computations while waiting for an external device to respond. Software 
12 CHAPTER 1 Introduction 
parallelism is subject to all of the complications and problems that we have seen 
in real life！and the solutions may not be as easy to see or to apply. You need 
enough threads, but not too many; enough communication, but not too much. A 
key to good threaded programming is learning how to judge the proper balance 
for each situation. 
Each thread can process similar parts of a problem, just like supermarket 
cashiers handling customers. Each thread can perform a specific operation on 
each data item in turn, just like the workers on an assembly line. Each thread 
can specialize in some specific operation and perform that operation repeatedly 
on behalf of other threads. You can combine these basic models in all sorts of 
ways; for example, in parallel assembly lines with some steps performed by a pool 
of servers. 
As you read this book you'll be introduced to concepts that may seem unfamil- 
iar: mutexes, condition variables, race conditions, deadlocks, and priority 
inversions. Threaded programming may feel daunting and unnatural. But I'll 
explain all those concepts as we move through this book, and once you've been 
writing multithreaded code for a while you may find yourself noticing real-world 
analogies to the concepts. Threads and all this other stuff are formalized and 
restricted representations of things you already understand. 
If you find yourself thinking that someone shouldn't interrupt you because 
you have the conversation mutex locked, you've begun to develop an intuitive 
understanding of threaded programming. You can apply that understanding to 
help you design better threaded code with less effort. If something wouldn't make 
sense in real life, you probably shouldn't try it in a program either. 
1.4 About the examples in this book 
This book contains a number of examples. All are presented as complete pro- 
grams, and they have been built and tested on Digital UNIX 4.0d and Solaris 2.5. 
All of these programs do something, but many do not do anything of any par- 
ticular importance. The purpose of the examples is to demonstrate thread 
management and synchronization techniques, which are mere overhead in most 
real programs. They would be less effective at revealing the details if that "over- 
head" was buried within large programs that "did something." 
Within the book, examples are presented in sections, usually one function at a 
time. The source code is separated from the surrounding text by a header and 
trailer block which include the file name and, if the example comprises more than 
one section, a section number and the name of the function. Each line of the 
source code has a line number at the left margin. Major functional blocks of each 
section are described in specially formatted paragraphs preceding the source 
code. These paragraphs are marked by line numbers outside the left margin of 
? It may also be a good time to take a break and read some healthy escapist fiction for a while. 
Asynchronous programming, by example 13 
the paragraph, denoting the line numbers in the source listing to which the para- 
graph refers. Here's an example: 
1-2 These lines show the header files included in most of the examples. The 
<pthread. h> header file declares constants and prototypes for the Pthreads func- 
tions, and the errors.h header file includes various other headers and some 
error-checking functions. 
| sample.c part 1 sampleinfo 
1 #include <pthread.h> 
2 iinclude "errors.h" 
| sample.c part 1 sampleinfo 
I have written these examples to use error checking everywhere. That is, I 
check for errors on each function call. As long as you code carefully, this isn't 
necessary, and some experts recommend testing only for errors that can result 
from insufficient resources or other problems beyond your control. I disagree, 
unless of course you're the sort of programmer who never makes a mistake. 
Checking for errors is not that tedious, and may save you a lot of trouble during 
debugging. 
You can build and run all of the examples for yourself！the source code is 
available online at http://www.aw.com/butenhof/posixcode.html. A Makefile is 
provided to build all of the examples, though it requires modifications for various 
platforms. On Digital UNIX, the examples were built with CFLAGS=-pthread 
-stdl -wl. On Solaris, they were built with cflags=-d_reentrant -d_posix_c_ 
SOURCE=199506 -lpthread. Some of the examples require interfaces that may not 
be in the Pthreads library on your system, for example, clock_gettime, which is 
part of the POSIX. lb realtime standard. The additional realtime library is speci- 
fied by the rtflags variable, which is defined as RTFLAGS=-lrt on Digital UNIX, 
and as RTFLAGS=-lposix4 on Solaris. 
On Solaris 2.5 systems, several of the examples require calls to thr_setcon- 
currency to ensure proper operation. This function causes Solaris to provide the 
process with additional concurrency. In a few cases, the example will not operate 
at all without this call, and in other cases, the example would fail to demonstrate 
some behavior. 
1.5 Asynchronous programming, by example 
"In one moment I've seen what has hitherto been 
Enveloped in absolute mystery, 
And without extra charge I will give you at large 
A Lesson in Natural History." 
！Lewis Carroll, The Hunting of the Snark 
14 CHAPTER l Introduction 
This section demonstrates some basic asynchronous programming, using a 
simple program that does something vaguely useful, by pretending to be an alarm 
clock with a command interface for which you would not consider paying a dime 
in a store. But then, this book is about threads, not user interfaces, and the code 
that I need to show takes up quite enough space already. 
The program prompts for input lines in a loop until it receives an error or end 
of file on stdin. On each line, the first nonblank token is interpreted as the num- 
ber of seconds to wait, and the rest of the line (up to 64 characters) is a message 
that will be printed when the wait completes. I will offer two additional versions！ 
one using multiple processes, and one using multiple threads. We'll use the three 
examples to compare the approaches. 
1.5.1 The baseline, synchronous version 
l Include the header file errors. h, which includes standard headers like 
<unistd.h> and <stdio.h> and defines error reporting macros that are used 
throughout the examples in this book. We don't use the error reporting macros in 
this particular example, but consistency is nice, sometimes. 
9-26 The "baseline" version, alarm.c, is a synchronous alarm program with a sin- 
gle routine, main. Most of main is a loop, which processes simple commands until 
f gets returns a NULL (error or end of file). Each line is "parsed" with sscanf to 
separate the number of seconds to wait (%d, the first sequence of digits) from the 
message string to print (%64[ A\n], the rest of the line, up to 64 characters exclud- 
ing newline). 
| alarm.c 
1 #include "errors.h" 
2 
3 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
4 { 
5 int seconds; 
6 char line[128]; 
7 char message[64]; 
8 
9 while A) { 
10 printf ("Alarm> "); 
11 if (fgets (line, sizeof (line), stdin) == NULL) exit @); 
12 if (strlen (line) <= 1) continue; 
13 
14 /* 
15 * Parse input line into seconds (%d) and a message 
16 * (%64[~\n]), consisting of up to 64 characters 
17 * separated from the seconds by whitespace. 
18 */ 
Asynchronous programming, by example 15 
19 if (sscanf (line, "%d %64['\n]", 
20 Sseconds, message) < 2) { 
21 fprintf (stderr, "Bad commandXn"); 
22 } else { 
23 sleep (seconds); 
24 printf ("(%d) %s\n", seconds, message); 
25 } 
26 } 
27 } 
| alarm.c 
The problem with the program alarm, c is that only one alarm request can be 
active at a time. If you set an alarm to remind you to do something in 10 minutes 
F00 seconds), you can't decide to have it remind you of something else in 5 min- 
utes. The program is doing something synchronously that you would probably 
like to be asynchronous. 
1.5.2 A version using multiple processes 
There are lots of ways to make this program asynchronous; for example, you 
could run more than one copy of the program. One way to run multiple copies is 
to fork a child process for each command, as shown in alarm_fork.c. The new 
version is asynchronous！you can enter commands at any time, and they will be 
carried out independently. It isn't much more complicated than the original, 
which is nice. 
27-37 The main difference between alarm.c and alarm_fork.c is that instead of 
calling sleep directly, it uses fork to create a new child process, which then calls 
sleep (and, eventually, printf) asynchronously, while the parent process 
continues. 
42-46 The primary complication in this version is the need to "reap" any child pro- 
cesses that have terminated. If the program fails to do this, the system will save 
them all until the program terminates. The normal way to reap terminated child 
processes is to call one of the wait functions. In this case, we call waitpid, which 
allows the caller to specify the wnohang flag. The function will immediately reap 
one child process if any have terminated, or will immediately return with a pro- 
cess ID (pid) of 0. The parent process continues to reap terminated child 
processes until there are no more to reap. When the loop terminates, main loops 
back to line 13 to read a new command. 
| alarm_fork.c 
1 #include <sys/types.h> 
2 #include <wait.h> 
3 #include "errors.h" 
4 
16 CHAPTER 1 Introduction 
5 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
6 { 
7 int status; 
8 char line[128]; 
9 int seconds; 
10 pid_t pid; 
11 char message[64]; 
12 
13 while A) { 
14 printf ("Alarm> " ); 
15 if (fgets (line, sizeof (line), stdin) == NULL) exit @); 
16 if (strlen (line) <= 1) continue; 
17 
18 /* 
19 * Parse input line into seconds (%d) and a message 
20 * (%64[A\n]), consisting of up to 64 characters 
21 * separated from the seconds by whitespace. 
22 */ 
23 if (sscanf (line, "%d %64["\n]", 
24 sseconds, message) < 2) { 
25 fprintf (stderr, "Bad command\n"); 
26 } else { 
27 pid = fork (); 
28 if (pid == (pid_t)-l) 
29 errno_abort ("Fork"); 
30 if (pid == (pid_tH) { 
31 /* 
32 * In the child, wait and then print a message 
33 */ 
34 sleep (seconds); 
35 printf ("(%d) %s\n", seconds, message); 
36 exit @); 
37 } else { 
38 /* 
39 * In the parent, call waitpid() to collect children 
40 * that have already terminated. 
41 */ 
42 do { 
43 pid = waitpid ((pid_t)-l, NULL, WNOHANG); 
44 if (pid == (pid_t)-l) 
45 errno_abort ("Wait for child"); 
46 } while (pid != (pid_tH); 
47 } 
48 } 
49 } 
50 } 
| alarm fork.c 
Asynchronous programming, by example 17 
1.5.3 A version using multiple threads 
Now, let us try another alarm program, alarm_thread.c. It is much like the 
fork version in alarm_fork.c, except that it uses threads instead of child pro- 
cesses to create asynchronous alarms. Four Pthreads calls are used in this 
program: 
? pthread_create creates a thread running the routine specified in the third 
argument (alarm_thread), returning an identifier for the new thread to the 
variable referenced by thread. 
? pthread_detach allows Pthreads to reclaim the thread's resources as soon 
as it terminates. 
? pthread_exit terminates the calling thread. 
? pthread_self returns the calling thread's identifier. 
4-7 The alarm_t structure defines the information stored for each alarm com- 
mand, the number of seconds until the alarm is due, and the message string that 
will be printed by the thread. 
| alarm_thread.c part 1 definitions 
1 #include <pthread.h> 
2 #include "errors.h" 
3 
4 typedef struct alarm_tag { 
5 int seconds; 
6 char message[64]; 
7 } alarm_t; 
| alarm_thread.c part 1 definitions 
1-8 The alarm_thread function is the "alarm thread." That is, each alarm thread 
is created running this function, and when the function returns the thread termi- 
nates. The function's argument (void *arg) is the fourth argument that was 
passed to pthread_create, in this case, a pointer to the control packet (alarm_t) 
created for the alarm request that the thread is to satisfy. The thread starts by 
"mapping" the void * argument as a pointer to a control packet. The thread 
detaches itself by calling pthread_detach, which informs Pthreads that the appli- 
cation does not need to know when the thread terminates or its termination 
status. 
9-12 The thread sleeps for the number of seconds specified in its control packet, 
and then prints the message string. Finally, the thread frees the control packet 
and returns. When a thread returns from its initial routine, as it does here, the 
thread terminates. Normally, Pthreads would hold the thread's resources so that 
another thread could later determine that it had exited and retrieve a final result. 
Because the thread detached itself, none of that is necessary. 
18 CHAPTER 1 Introduction 
| alarm_thread.c part 2 alarm_thread 
1 void *alarm_thread (void *arg) 
2 { 
3 alarm_t *alarm = (alarm_t*)arg; 
4 int status; 
5 
6 status = pthread_detach (pthread_self ()); 
7 if (status != 0) 
8 err_abort (status, "Detach thread"); 
9 sleep (alarm->seconds); 
10 printf ("(%d) %s\n", alarm->seconds, alarm->message); 
11 free (alarm); 
12 return NULL; 
13 } 
| alarm_thread.c part 2 alarm_thread 
The main program of alarm_thread.c is much the same as the other two vari- 
ants. It loops, reading and interpreting command lines as long as it can read from 
stdin. 
12-25 In this variation, main allocates heap storage (alarm_t) for each alarm com- 
mand. The alarm time and message are stored in this structure, so each thread 
can be given the appropriate information. If the sscanf call fails to "parse" a cor- 
rect command, the heap storage is freed. 
26-29 An alarm thread is created, running function alarm_thread, with the alarm 
data (alarm_t) as the thread's argument. 
| alarm_thread.c part 3 main 
1 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
2 { 
3 int status; 
4 char line[128]; 
5 alar.ti_t *alarm; 
6 pthread_t thread; 
7 
8 while A) { 
9 printf ("Alarm> "); 
10 if (fgets (line, sizeof (line), stdin) == NULL) exit @); 
11 if (strlen (line) <= 1) continue; 
12 alarm = (alarm_t*)malloc (sizeof (alarm_t)); 
13 if (alarm == NULL) 
14 errno_abort ("Allocate alarm"); 
15 
16 /* 
17 * Parse input line into seconds (%d) and a message 
18 * (%64p\n]), consisting of up to 64 characters 
19 * separated from the seconds by whitespace. 
20 */ 
Asynchronous programming, by example 19 
21 if (sscanf (line, "%d %64["\n]", 
22 &alarm->seconds, alarm->message) < 2) { 
23 fprintf (stderr, "Bad command\n"); 
24 free (alarm); 
25 } else { 
2 6 status = pthread_create ( 
27 Sthread, NULL, alarm_thread, alarm); 
28 if (status != 0) 
29 err_abort (status, "Create alarm thread"); 
30 } 
31 } 
32 } 
| alarm thread.c part 3 main 
1.5.4 Summary 
A good way to start thinking about threads is to compare the two asynchro- 
nous versions of the alarm program. First, in the fork version, each alarm has an 
independent address space, copied from the main program. That means we can 
put the seconds and message values into local variables！once the child has 
been created (when fork returns), the parent can change the values without 
affecting the alarm. In the threaded version, on the other hand, all threads share 
the same address space！so we call malloc to create a new structure for each 
alarm, which is passed to the new thread. The extra bookkeeping required intro- 
duces a little complexity into the threaded version. 
In the version using fork, the main program needs to tell the kernel to free 
resources used by each child process it creates, by calling waitpid or some other 
member of the wait "family." The alarm_fork.c program, for example, calls 
waitpid in a loop after each command, to collect all child processes that have 
completed. You do not need to wait for a thread unless you need the thread's 
return value！in alarm_thread.c, for example, each alarm thread detaches itself 
(at line 6, part 2) so that the resources held by the thread will be returned imme- 
diately when it terminates. 
In the threaded version, the "primary activities" (sleeping and printing the 
message) must be coded in a separate routine. In alarm.c and alarm_fork.c, 
those activities were performed without a call. In simple cases such as our alarm 
program, it is often easier to understand the program with all code in one place, 
so that might seem like an advantage for alarm_fork.c. In more complicated pro- 
grams, though, it is rare that a program's "primary activities" are so simple that 
they can be performed in a single routine without resulting in total confusion. 
In a real alarm program, you wouldn't want to create a process for each alarm. 
You might easily have hundreds of alarms active, and the system probably 
wouldn't let you create that many processes. On the other hand, you probably can 
create hundreds of threads within a process. While there is no real need to main- 
tain a stack and thread context for each alarm request, it is a perfectly viable 
design. 
f 
20 CHAPTER 1 Introduction 
A more sophisticated version of alarm_thread.c might use only two threads: 
one to read input from the user, and another to wait for expiration of the next 
alarm！I'll show that version later, after we've worked through some more basic 
concepts. You could do the same thing with two processes, of course, but it would 
be more cumbersome. Passing information between two threads is easy and 
fast！no shared memory to map, no pipes to read or write, no concerns about 
whether you are passing addresses that may not mean the same thing in both 
processes. Threads share everything in their address space！any address that's 
valid in one thread is valid in all threads. 
1.6 Benefits of threading 
"'O Looklng-Glass creatures,'quoth Alice, 'draw near! 
'Tis an honour to see me, a favour to hear: 
'Tis a privilege high to have dinner and tea 
Along with the Red Queen, the White Queen, and me!'" 
！Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking-Glass 
Some advantages of the multithreaded programming model follow: 
1. Exploitation of program parallelism on multiprocessor hardware. Parallel- 
ism is the only benefit that requires special hardware. The others can help 
most programs without special hardware. 
2. More efficient exploitation of a program's natural concurrency, by allowing 
the program to perform computations while waiting for slow I/O opera- 
tions to complete. 
3. A modular programming model that clearly expresses relationships 
between independent "events" within the program. 
These advantages are detailed in the following sections. 
1.6.1 Parallelism 
On a multiprocessor system, threading allows a process to perform more than 
one independent computation at the same time. A computation-intensive 
threaded application running on two processors may achieve nearly twice the 
performance of a traditional single-threaded version. "Nearly twice" takes into 
account the fact that you'll always have some overhead due to creating the extra 
thread(s) and performing synchronization. This effect is often referred to as 
"scaling." A two-processor system may perform 1.95 times as fast as a single pro- 
cessor, a three-processor system 2.9 times as fast, a four-processor system 3.8 
times as fast, and so forth. Scaling almost always falls off as the number of pro- 
cessors increases because there's more chance of lock and memory collisions, 
which cost time. 
Benefits of threading 
21 
Speedup = 
A - p) + ? 
FIGURE 1.1 Amdahl's laui 
Scaling can be predicted by "Amdahl's law," which is shown in Figure 1.1. In 
the equation, p represents the ratio of "parallelizable code" over "total execution 
time," and n represents the number of processors the code can use. The total 
elapsed time for a parallel job is the sum of the elapsed time for the nonparalleliz- 
able work A - p) and the elapsed time for each processor executing the 
parallelizable work [p/ri). 
Amdahl's law is a simple relationship showing how parallelism is limited by 
the amount of serialization needed. When the program has no parallelizable code 
(p is 0), the speedup is 1. That is, it is not a parallel program. If the program 
requires no synchronization or other serial code (p is 1), then the speedup is n 
(the number of processors). As more synchronization is required, parallelism pro- 
vides less benefit. To put it another way, you'll get better scaling with activities 
that are completely independent than with activities that are highly dependent: 
The independent activities need less synchronization. 
The diagram in Figure 1.2 shows the effect of Amdahl's law. "Clock time" 
progresses from left to right across the page, and the diagram shows the number 
of processors working in parallel at any moment. Areas where the diagram has 
only a single horizontal line show that the process is serialized. Areas that have 
several horizontal lines in parallel show where the process benefits from multiple 
processors. If you can apply multiple processors for only 10% of your program's 
execution time, and you have four processors, then Amdahl's law predicts a 
speedup of 1 / @.9+ @.1 /4)), or about 8%. 
FIGURE 1.2 Parallelism charted against time 
22 CHAPTER 1 Introduction 
Operations on large matrices can often be "parallelized" by splitting the matrix 
into pieces. For example, each thread may be able to operate on a set of rows or 
columns without requiring any data written by threads operating on other slices. 
You still generally need to synchronize threads at the beginning and end of pro- 
cessing the matrix, frequently using a barrier. Amdahl's law shows that you'll get 
better performance by giving each thread a large and relatively independent 
"chunk" of work, requiring infrequent synchronization, than by giving them 
smaller chunks. 
Amdahl's law is an excellent thought exercise to help you understand scaling. 
It is not, however, a practical tool, because it is nearly impossible to accurately 
compute p for any program. To be accurate, you need to consider not only all 
serialized regions within your code, but also within the operating system kernel 
and even in hardware. Multiprocessor hardware must have some mechanism to 
synchronize access to the contents of memory. When each processor has a pri- 
vate data cache, the contents of those caches must be kept consistent with each 
other and with the data in memory. All of this serialization must be included in 
any accurate calculation. 
1.6.2 Concurrency 
The threaded programming model allows the program to make computational 
progress while waiting for blocking operations like I/O. This is useful for network 
servers and clients, and it is the main reason that client/server systems (such as 
OSF DCE) use threads. While one thread waits for a long network read or write 
operation, that thread is blocked and other threads in your application can exe- 
cute independently. Some systems support asynchronous I/O operations, which 
can give similar advantages; but most UNIX-based systems do not have asynchro- 
nous I/O.f Furthermore, asynchronous I/O is generally a lot more complicated to 
use than threads. 
For example, you need to either handle asynchronous notification when the 
I/O completes, or poll for completion. If you issued an asynchronous I/O and 
then entered a polling loop, you would lose the advantage of asynchronous I/O！ 
your application would just wait. If you poll elsewhere, or handle asynchronous 
notification, then issuing the I/O and processing the resulting data occur in dif- 
ferent locations within your program. That makes the code more difficult to 
*A barrier is a simple synchronization mechanism that blocks each thread until a certain 
number has reached the barrier; then all threads are unblocked. Barriers can be used, for 
example, to keep any thread from executing a parallel region of code until all threads are ready 
to execute the region. Section 7.1.1 describes barriers in more detail, and demonstrates the con- 
struction of a simple barrier package. 
t UNIX systems support "nonblocking I/O," but this is not the same thing as asynchronous 
I/O. Nonblocking I/O allows the program to defer issuing an I/O operation until it can complete 
without blocking, but asynchronous I/O can proceed while the program does something else. 
Benefits of threading 23 
analyze and maintain. When you use synchronous I/O you just perform the I/O 
and then do whatever comes next. Synchronous I/O within multiple threads 
gives nearly all the advantages of asynchronous I/O. In most cases you will find it 
much easier to write complex asynchronous code using threads than using tradi- 
tional asychronous programming techniques. 
You could write an alarm program, like those shown in Section 1.5, as an 
asynchronous program without using processes or threads, with timer signals for 
the alarms and asynchronous reads for input. Using timer signals is more com- 
plicated in many ways, since you are severely limited in what you can do within a 
signal handler. Asynchronous I/O does not allow you to take advantage of the 
convenience of stdio functions. The basic program function will be scattered 
through a series of signal handlers and functions, and will probably be harder to 
understand. 
Asynchronous I/O does have one advantage over threaded concurrency, 
though. Just as a thread is usually "cheaper" (in execution time and storage 
space) than a process, the context required for an asynchronous I/O operation is 
almost always cheaper than a thread. If you plan to have a lot of asynchronous 
I/O operations active at the same time, that might be important enough to justify 
using the more complicated programming model. But watch out！some "asyn- 
chronous I/O" packages just distribute your I/O requests across a pool of 
threads! Most of the time you will be better off using threads. 
Another method of coding an asynchronous application is for each action to 
be treated as an "event." Events are queued by some "hidden" process, and dis- 
patched serially to be handled by the application, usually through "callback" 
routines registered with the dispatcher. Event dispatchers have been popularized 
by windowing interface systems such as the Apple Macintosh toolbox, Microsoft 
Windows, and X Windows on UNIX (used by Motif and CDE). 
The event mechanism alleviates much of the complication of using signals and 
asynchronous I/O, as long as the events are supported directly by the event dis- 
patcher. All, for example, handle input from the keyboard or pointer device, and 
generally one can request a timer event to be inserted automatically at a desired 
time. Thus, the alarm program, written to an event interface, need only initialize 
the event dispatcher and enter a loop to process events. Input events would be 
dispatched to the parser, resulting in a request for a new timer event; and timer 
events would be dispatched to a function that would format and print the alarm 
message. 
For very simple applications (and the alarm program here is certainly one 
example), an event-based implementation may be simpler than the multiprocess 
or multithread variations I've shown！at least when the (often substantial) over- 
head of initializing the event dispatcher is removed. The limitations of events 
become more obvious when you build larger and more sophisticated applica- 
tions！the problem is that the events are sequential. 
Events are not concurrent, and the program can do only one thing at a time. 
Your application receives an event, processes it, and then receives the next event. 
If processing an event takes a long time, for example, sorting a large database, 
24 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction 
the user interface may remain unresponsive for quite a while. If an event involves 
a long wait, for example, reading data over a slow network connection, then, 
again, the user must wait. 
The response problems can be minimized by liberally sprinkling extended 
operations with calls to the event dispatcher！but getting them in the right place, 
without substantially impacting the performance of the operation, can be diffi- 
cult. Furthermore, you may not have that option, if the database sort is taking 
place in a shared library you bought from somebody else. 
On the other hand, one might code the application to create a new thread that 
runs the database sort, or reads from the slow network, leaving the "user inter- 
face" thread to immediately request another event. The application becomes 
responsive, while the slow operation continues to run. You can do this even if a 
database package, for example, cannot tolerate being run in multiple threads, by 
queuing a "sort" command to a server thread that runs database operations 
serially！while still retaining interface responsiveness. 
1.6.3 Programming model 
It may be surprising that programming with threads is a good idea even if you 
know your code will never run on a multiprocessor. But it is true. Writing with 
threads forces you to think about and plan for the synchronization requirements 
of your program. You've always had to think about program dependencies, but 
threads help to move the requirements from comments into the executable struc- 
ture of the program. 
Assembly language programs can use all the same sequential control struc- 
tures (loops, conditional code) as programs written in a high-level language. 
However, it can be difficult to determine whether a branch instruction represents 
the top or bottom of a loop, a simple conditional, a "conditional goto," or some- 
thing more exotic. Switching to a higher-level language that supports these 
sequential controls directly in source, for example, the C language do, while, for, 
if, and switch statements, makes these sequential programming constructs 
explicit in the source language. Making control structures explicit in the program 
source code means that more of your program's design is explicit in the source, 
and that makes it easier for someone else to understand. 
Similarly, a C language program (or even an assembler program) may use data 
encapsulation and polymorphism by adhering to programming conventions, and 
with luck those conventions may be carefully documented and the documenta- 
tion kept updated. But if that same code is written in an object-oriented language, 
the encapsulation and polymorphism become explicit in the source language. 
In a sequential program, synchronization requirements are implicit in the 
ordering of operations. The true synchronization requirements, for example, that 
"a file must be opened before data can be read from the file," may be documented 
only by source comments, if at all. When you program using threads, sequential 
assumptions are (or at least should be) limited to small segments of contiguous 
Costs of threading 25 
code！for example, within a single function. More global assumptions, to be at all 
safe, must be protected by explicit synchronization constructs. 
In traditional serial programming you call function A to do one thing, then call 
another function B to do something else, even when those two functions don't 
require serialization. If a developer is trying to determine what the program is 
doing, perhaps to trace a bug, it often isn't obvious that there may be no need to 
follow both calls. Furthermore, the strictly serial model makes it easy for some- 
one to inadvertently make function B dependent on some side effect of function A. 
If a later modification reverses the order of the calls, the program may break in 
ways that aren't obvious. Program dependencies may be documented using source 
code comment blocks, but comments are often ambiguous and may not be prop- 
erly updated when code is changed. 
The threaded programming model isolates independent or loosely coupled 
functional execution streams (threads) in a clear way that's made explicit in the 
program's source code. If activities are designed as threads, each function must 
include explicit synchronization to enforce its dependencies. Because synchroni- 
zation is executable code, it can't be ignored when dependencies are changed. 
The presence of synchronization constructs allows anyone reading the code to 
follow temporal dependencies within the code, which can make maintenance 
substantially easier, especially for large programs with a lot of independent code. 
An assembly language programmer can write better, more maintainable assem- 
bly code by understanding high-level language programming; a C language 
programmer can write better, more maintainable C code by understanding object- 
oriented programming. Even if you never write a threaded program, you may ben- 
efit from understanding the threaded programming model of independent 
functions with explicit dependencies. These are "mental models" (or that dread- 
fully overused word, "paradigms") that are more or less independent of the specific 
code sequences you write. Cleanly isolating functionally independent code may 
even make sequential programs easier to understand and maintain. 
1.7 Costs of threading 
All this time the Guard was looking at her, first through a telescope, then 
through a microscope, and then through an opera-glass. 
At last he said, "You're traveling the wrong way," 
and shut up the window, and went away. 
！Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking-Glass 
Of course there's always "the flip side." As I showed in the previous section, 
threads provide definite and powerful advantages, even on uniprocessor systems. 
They provide even more advantages on a multiprocessor. 
So why wouldn't you want to use threads? Everything has a cost, and 
threaded programming is no exception. In many cases the advantage exceeds the 
26 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction 
cost; in others it doesn't. To be fair, the following subsections discuss the cost of 
threaded programming. 
1.7.1 Computing overhead 
Overhead costs in threaded code include direct effects such as the time it 
takes to synchronize your threads. Many clever algorithms are available for 
avoiding synchronization in some cases, but none of them is portable. You'll have 
to use some synchronization in just about any threaded code. It is easy to lose 
performance by using too much synchronization; for example, by separately pro- 
tecting two variables that are always used together. Protecting each variable 
separately means you spend a lot more time on synchronization without gaining 
parallelism, since any thread that needs one variable will need the other as well. 
The overhead of threaded programming can also include more subtle effects. 
For example, threads that constantly write the same memory locations may spend 
a lot of time synchronizing the memory system on processors that support "read/ 
write ordering." Other processors may spend that time synchronizing only when 
you use special instructions such as a memory barrier, or a "multiprocessor 
atomic" operation like test-and-set. Section 3.4 says a lot more about these effects. 
Removing a bottleneck in your code, for example, by adding threads to perform 
multiple concurrent I/O operations, may end up revealing another bottleneck at a 
lower level！in the ANSI C library, the operating system, the file system, the device 
driver, the memory or I/O architecture, or the device controller. These effects are 
often difficult to predict, or measure, and are usually not well documented. 
A compute-bound thread, which rarely blocks for any external event, cannot 
effectively share a processor with other compute-bound threads. An I/O thread 
might interrupt it once in a while, but the I/O thread would block for another 
external event and the compute-bound thread would run again. When you create 
more compute-bound threads than there are available processors, you may gain 
better code structuring over a single-threaded implementation, but you will have 
worse performance. The performance suffers because the multithreaded imple- 
mentation adds thread synchronization and scheduling overhead to the work you 
wanted to accomplish！and does it all using the same compute resources. 
1.7.2 Programming discipline 
Despite the basic simplicity of the threaded programming model, writing real- 
world code is never trivial. Writing code that works well in multiple threads takes 
careful thought and planning. You have to keep track of synchronization proto- 
cols and program invariants. You have to avoid deadlocks, races, and priority 
inversions. I'll describe all of these things in later sections, show how to design 
code to avoid the problems, and how to find and repair them after the fact. 
Costs of threading 27 
You will almost certainly use library code that you did not write. Some will be 
supplied with the operating system you use, and most of the more common 
libraries will likely be safe to use within multiple threads. POSIX guarantees that 
most functions specified by ANSI C and POSIX must be safe for use by multi- 
threaded applications. However, a lot of "interesting" functions you will probably 
need are not included in that list. You will often need to call libraries that are not 
supplied with the operating system, for example, database software. Some of that 
code will not be thread-safe. I will discuss techniques to allow you to use most 
unsafe code, but they will not always work, and they can be ugly. 
All threads within a process share the same address space, and there's no 
protection boundary between the threads. If a thread writes to memory through 
an uninitialized pointer, it can wipe out another thread's stack, or heap memory 
being used by some other thread. The eventual failure will most likely occur in 
the innocent victim, possibly long after the perpetrator has gone on to other 
things. This can be especially important if arbitrary code is run within a thread. 
For example, in a library that supports callbacks to functions supplied by its 
caller, be sure that the callback, as well as the library, is thread-safe. 
The important points are that good sequential code is not necessarily good 
threaded code, and bad threaded code will break in ways that are more difficult to 
locate and repair. Thinking about real-life parallelism can help a lot, but pro- 
gramming requires a lot more detailed work than most things in real life. 
1.7.3 Harder to debug 
You will learn more about debugging threaded code, and, more importantly, 
not debugging threaded code, in Chapter 8. You will see some of the tools you 
may encounter as well as some techniques you can use on your own. By then 
you will know all about mutexes and memory visibility, and you will be ready to 
deal with deadlocks and races. Don't worry about the details now！the point of 
this brief section is to demonstrate that you will have to learn about threaded 
debugging, and it is not as easy yet as anyone would like it to be. (So when was 
debugging ever easy?) 
Systems that support threads generally extend traditional sequential debug- 
ging tools to provide basic debugging support. The system may provide a 
debugger that allows you to see the call tree for all of your program's threads, for 
example, and set breakpoints that activate only in particular threads. The system 
may provide some form of performance analyzer that lets you measure the pro- 
cessor time accumulated within each function for a specific thread or across all 
threads. 
Unfortunately that's only the beginning of the problems when you're debug- 
ging asynchronous code. Debugging inevitably changes the timing of events. That 
doesn't matter much when you're debugging sequential code, but it is critical 
when you're debugging asynchronous code. If one thread runs even slightly 
slower than another because it had to process a debugger trap, the problem you're 
28 
CHAPTER l Introduction 
trying to track down may not happen. Every programmer has run into problems 
that won't reproduce under the debugger. You'll run into a lot more of them when 
you use threads. 
It is difficult to track down a memory corruptor, for example, a function that 
writes through an uninitialized pointer, in a sequential program. It is even harder 
in a threaded program. Did some other thread write to memory without using a 
mutex? Did it use the wrong mutex? Did it count on another thread setting up a 
pointer without explicit synchronization? Was it just an old fashioned sequential 
memory corruptor? 
Various additional tools are provided by some systems to help you. None of 
these is standard or widely available. Tools may check source code for obvious 
violations of locking protocol, given a definition of which variables are shared and 
how they should be locked. They may record thread interactions while the pro- 
gram runs, and allow you to analyze or even replay the interactions to determine 
what happened. They may record and measure synchronization contention and 
overhead. They may detect complicated deadlock conditions between a set of 
mutexes. 
Your most powerful and portable thread debugging tool is your mind, applied 
through the old fashioned manual human-powered code review. You'll probably 
spend a lot of time setting up a few breakpoints and examining lots of states to try 
to narrow the problem down a little and then carefully reading the code to find 
problems. It is best if you have someone available who didn't write the code, 
because a lot of the worst errors are embarrassingly obvious to someone who's 
not burdened with detailed knowledge of what the code was supposed to do. 
1.8 To thread or not to thread? 
"My poor client's fate now depends on your votes." 
Here the speaker sat down in his place, 
And directed the Judge to refer to his notes 
And briefly to sum up the case. 
！Lewis Carroll, The Hunting of the Snark 
Threads don't necessarily provide the best solution to every programming 
problem. They're not always easier to use, and they don't always result in better 
performance. 
A few problems are really "inherently nonconcurrent," and adding threads will 
only slow the program down and complicate it. If every step in your program 
depends directly on the result of the previous step, then using threads probably 
won't help. Each thread would have to wait for another thread to complete. 
The most obvious candidates for threaded coding are new applications that 
accomplish the following: 
POSIX thread concepts 29 
1. Perform extensive computation that can be parallelized (or "decomposed") 
into multiple threads, and which is intended to run on multiprocessor 
hardware, or 
2. Perform substantial I/O which can be overlapped to improve throughput！ 
many threads can wait for different I/O requests at the same time. Distrib- 
uted server applications are good candidates, since they may have work to 
do in response to multiple clients, and they must also be prepared for 
unsolicited I/O over relatively slow network connections. 
Most programs have some natural concurrency, even if it is only reading a 
command from the input device while processing the previous command. 
Threaded applications are often faster, and usually more responsive, than 
sequential programs that do the same job. They are generally much easier to 
develop and maintain than nonthreaded asynchronous applications that do the 
same job. 
So should you use threads? You probably won't find them appropriate for 
every programming job you approach. But threaded programming is a technique 
that all software developers should understand. 
1.9 POSIX thread concepts 
"You seem very clever at explaining words, Sir," said Alice. 
"Would you kindly tell me the meaning of the poem 
called 'Jabberwocky'?" 
"Let's hear it," said Humpty Dumpty. "I can explain all 
the poems that ever were invented！and a good many 
that haven't been invented just yet." 
！Lewis Carroll. Through the Looking-Glass 
First of all, this book focuses on "POSIX threads." Technically, that means the 
thread "application programming interfaces" (API) specified by the international 
formal standard POSIX 1003.1c-1995. This standard was approved by the IEEE 
in June 1995. A new edition of POSIX 1003.1, called ISO/IEC 9945-1:1996 (ANSI/ 
IEEE Std 1003.1, 1996 Edition) is available from the IEEE.* This new document 
includes 1003.1b-1993 (realtime), 1003.1c-1995 (threads), and 1003.H-1995 
(corrections to 1003.1b-1993). Unless you are writing an implementation of the 
standard, or are extremely curious, you probably don't want to bother buying the 
* Contact the IEEE at 1-800-678-IEEE. 9945-1:1996 Information Technology！Portable Opera- 
ting System Interface (POSIX)！Part 1: System Application: Program Interface (API) [C Language], 
ISBN 1-55937-573-6, order number SH94352. 
30 
CHAPTER l Introduction 
POSIX standard. For writing threaded code, you'll find books like this one much 
more useful, supplemented by the programming documentation for the operating 
system you're using. 
As I explained in the preface, I will use the informal term "Pthreads" to refer to 
"POSIX 1003.1c-1995." I will use the slightly more formal term "POSIX. lb" to 
refer to "POSIX 1003.1b-1993" in the text, "POSIX. 14" to refer to the POSIX 
1003.14 "Multiprocessor Profile," and similar abbreviated notation for other 
POSIX standards. I'll use the full names where precision is important, for exam- 
ple, to compare POSIX 1003.1-1990 and POSIX 1003.1-1996, and also in section 
titles and captions that appear in the table of contents. 
1.9.1 Architectural overview 
You may remember from Section 1.2 that the three essential aspects of a 
thread system are execution context, scheduling, and synchronization. When 
you evaluate any thread system, or compare any two thread systems, start by 
categorizing the features into capabilities that support execution contexts, 
scheduling, and synchronization. 
With Pthreads, you create an execution context (thread) by calling pthread_ 
create. Creating a thread also schedules the thread for execution, and it will 
begin by calling a "thread start function" that you specified. Pthreads allows you 
to specify scheduling parameters either at the time you create the thread, or later 
on while the thread is running. A thread normally terminates when it calls 
pthread_exit, or returns from the thread start function, although we will 
encounter a few other possibilities later. 
The primary Pthreads synchronization model uses mutexes for protection and 
condition variables for communication. You can also use other synchronization 
mechanisms such as semaphores, pipes, and message queues. A mutex allows 
one thread to lock shared data while using it so that other threads cannot acci- 
dentally interfere. A condition variable allows a thread to wait for shared data to 
reach some desired state (such as "queue not empty" or "resource available"). 
1.9.2 Types and interfaces 
This section briefly outlines the Pthreads data types, and some of the rules for 
interpreting them. For a full description of the "object" represented by each type 
and how to create and use those objects in a program, see the appropriate sec- 
tions later in this book, as shown in Table 1.2. 
POSIX thread concepts 
Type 
pthread t 
pthread mutex t 
pthread cond t 
pthread key t 
pthread attr t 
pthread mutexattr t 
pthread condattr t 
pthread once t 
Section 
2 
3.2 
3.3 
5.4 
5.2.3 
5.2.1 
5.2.2 
5.1 
31 
Description 
thread identifier 
mutex 
condition variable 
"access key" for thread-specific data 
thread attributes object 
mutex attributes object 
condition variable attributes object 
"one time initialization" control context 
TABLE 1.2 POSIX threads types 
I All Pthreads types are "opaque," 
Portable code cannot make assumptions regarding the representation 
of these types. 
All of the "pthread" types listed in Table 1.2 are considered opaque. There is no 
public definition of these types' representation, and programmers should never 
assume anything about the representation. You should use them only in the man- 
ner specifically described by the standard. A thread identifier, for example, may be 
an integer, or a pointer, or a structure, and any code that uses a thread identifier 
in a way that is not compatible with all of those definitions is incorrect. 
1.9.3 Checking for errors 
I Pthreads introduces a new way to report errors, without using the 
I errno variable. 
The Pthreads amendment is the first part of POSIX to depart from the ancient 
UNIX and C language conventions regarding error status. Traditionally, functions 
that succeed returned a useful value if appropriate, or otherwise indicated suc- 
cess by returning the value 0. On failure, they returned the special value -1, and 
set the global value errno to a code specifying the type of error. 
The old mechanism has a number of problems, including the fact that it is dif- 
ficult to create a function that can both report an error and return a useful value 
of -1. There are even worse problems when you add multiple threads to a pro- 
cess. In traditional UNIX systems, and in the original POSIX. 1-1990 standard, 
errno was an extern int variable. Since such a variable can have only one value 
at a time, it can support only a single stream of execution within the process. 
32 
CHAPTER l Introduction 
I Pthreads functions don't set errno on errors! 
(But most other POSIX functions do.) 
New functions in the Pthreads standard reserve the return value for error sta- 
tus, and errno is not used. Pthreads functions return the value 0 on success, 
and include an extra output parameter to specify an address where "useful 
results" are stored. When a function cannot complete successfully, an error code 
from the <errno.h> header file is returned instead of 0 as the function value. 
Pthreads also provides a per-thread errno, which supports other code that 
uses errno. This means that when one thread calls some function that reports an 
error using errno, the value cannot be overwritten, or read, by any other thread！ 
you may go on using errno just as you always have. But if you're designing new 
interfaces you should consider following the new Pthreads convention for report- 
ing errors. Setting or reading the per-thread errno involves more overhead than 
reading or writing a memory location, or returning a value from a function. 
To wait for a thread, for example, and check for an error, you might use code 
like that shown in the following code example, thread_error.c. The pthread_ 
join function, used to wait for a thread to terminate, will report an invalid thread 
identifier by returning the error code ESRCH. An uninitialized pthread_t is likely 
to be an invalid thread identifier on most implementations. The result of running 
this program should be a message such as "error 3: no such process." 
In the unlikely event that the uninitialized thread variable has a pthread_t 
value that is not invalid, it should be the ID of the initial thread (there are no 
other threads in this process). In this case, pthread_join should either fail with 
edeadlk, if your implementation of Pthreads detects self-deadlock, or the thread 
will hang waiting for itself to exit. 
thread error.c 
1 #include <pthread.h> 
2 #include <stdio.h> 
3 #include <errno.h> 
4 
5 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
6 { 
7 pthread_t thread; 
8 int status; 
9 
10 /* 
11 * Attempt to join with an uninitialized thread ID. On most 
12 * implementations, this will return an ESRCH error code. If 
13 * the local (and uninitialized) pthread_t happens to be a valid 
14 * thread ID, it is almost certainly that of the initial thread, 
15 * which is running main(). In that case, your Pthreads 
16 * implementation may either return EDEADLK (self-deadlock), 
17 * or it may hang. If it hangs, quit and try again. 
18 */ 
POSIX thread concepts 
33 
19 status = pthread_join (thread, NULL); 
20 if (status != 0) 
21 fprintf (stderr, "error %d: %s\n", status, strerror (status)); 
2 2 return status; 
23 } 
| thread_error.c 
Note that there is no equivalent to the perror function to format and print an 
error value returned by the Pthreads interfaces. Instead, use strerror to get a 
string description of the error number, and print the string to the file stream 
stderr. 
To avoid cluttering each function call in the example programs with a block of 
code to report each error and call abort, I have built two error macros！err_abort 
detects a standard Pthreads error, and errno_abort is used when a value of-1 
means that errno contains an error code. The following header file, called 
errors.h, shows these macros. The errors.h header file also includes several 
system header files, which would otherwise be required by most of the example 
programs！this helps to reduce the size of the examples. 
errors.h 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
#ifndef 
#define 
errors_h 
errors h 
#include <unistd.h> 
#include <errno.h> 
#include <stdio.h> 
#include <stdlib.h> 
|include <string.h> 
/* 
* Define a macro that can be used for diagnostic output from 
* examples. When compiled -DDEBUG, it results in calling printf 
* with the specified argument list. When DEBUG is not defined, it 
* expands to nothing. 
*/ 
#ifdef DEBUG 
# define DPRINTF(arg) printf arg 
#else 
# define DPRINTF(arg) 
#endif 
/* 
* NOTE: the "do {" ... "} while @);" bracketing around the macros 
* allows the err_abort and errno_abort macros to be used as if they 
* were function calls, even in contexts where a trailing ";" would 
* generate a null statement. For example, 
I 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction 
27 * 
28 * if (status != 0) 
29 * err_abort (status, "message"); 
30 * else 
31 * return status; 
32 * 
33 * will not compile if err_abort is a macro ending with "}", because 
34 * C does not expect a ";" to follow the "}". Because C does expect 
35 * a ";" following the ")" in the do...while construct, err_abort and 
36 * errno_abort can be used as if they were function calls. 
37 */ 
38 #define err_abort(code,text) do { \ 
39 fprintf (stderr, "%s at \"%s\":%d: %s\n", \ 
40 text, FILE , LINE , strerror (code)); \ 
41 abort (); \ 
42 } while @) 
43 #define errno_abort(text) do { \ 
44 fprintf (stderr, "%s at \"%s\":%d: %s\n", 
45 text, FILE , LINE_ 
46 abort (); \ 
47 } while @) 
48 
49 #endif 
| errors.h 
\ 
strerror (errno)); \ 
The one exception to the Pthreads error rules is pthread_getspecif ic, which 
returns the thread-specific data value of a shared "key." Section 5.4 describes 
thread-specific data in detail, but for now we're just concerned with error report- 
ing. The capability of managing thread-specific data is critical to many 
applications, and the function has to be as fast as possible, so the pthread_ 
getspecif ic function doesn't report errors at all. If the pthread_key_t value is 
illegal, or if no value has been set in the thread, pthread_getspecif ic just 
returns the value null. 
2 Threads 
"If seven maids with seven mops 
Swept it for half a year, 
Do you suppose," the Walrus said, 
"That they could get it clear?" 
"I doubt it," said the Carpenter, 
And shed a bitter tear. 
！Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking-Glass 
Threads are (and perhaps this will come as no surprise) the essential basis of 
the style of programming that I am advocating. Although this chapter focuses on 
threads, you will never learn everything you need to know about threads by sim- 
ply skipping to this chapter and reading it. Threads are a critical part of the 
landscape, but you can't do much with only threads. Nevertheless, one must 
start somewhere, and here we are. 
Section 2.1 describes the programming aspects of creating and managing 
threads in your program, that is, how to create threads, how they are represented 
in your program, and the most basic things you can do to them once you've cre- 
ated them. 
Section 2.2 describes the life cycle of a thread, from creation through "recy- 
cling," taking you through all the scheduling states threads can assume along 
the way. 
2.1 Creating and using threads 
"A loaf of bread," the Walrus said, 
"Is what we chiefly need: 
Pepper and vinegar besides 
Are very good indeed！ 
Now, if you're ready, Oysters dear, 
We can begin to feed." 
！Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking-Glass 
35 
36 
CHAPTER 2 Threads 
pthread_t thread; 
int pthread_equal (pthread_t tl, pthread_t t2); 
int pthread_create (pthread_t *thread, 
const pthread_attr_t *attr, 
void *(*start)(void *), void *arg); 
pthread_t pthread_self (void); 
int sched_yield (void); 
int pthread_exit (void *value_ptr); 
int pthread_detach (pthread_t thread); 
int pthread_join (pthread_t thread, void **value_ptr); 
The introduction covered some of the basics of what a thread is, and what it 
means to the computer hardware. This section begins where the introduction left 
off. It explains how a thread is represented in your program, what it means to 
your program, and some of the operations you can perform on threads. If you 
haven't read the introduction, this would be a good time to skip back to it. (I'll 
wait for you here.) 
Within your program a thread is represented by a thread identifier, of the 
opaque type pthread_t. To create a thread, you must declare a variable of type 
pthread_t somewhere in your program. If the identifier is needed only within a 
function, or if the function won't return until the thread is done, you could 
declare the identifier with auto storage class. Most of the time, though, the iden- 
tifier will be stored in a shared (static or extern) variable, or in a structure 
allocated from the heap. 
A Pthreads thread begins by calling some function that you provide. This 
"thread function" should expect a single argument of type void *, and should 
return a value of the same type. You create a thread by passing the thread func- 
tion's address, and the argument value with which you want the function to be 
called, to pthread_create. 
When you create a thread, pthread_create returns an identifier, in the 
pthread_t value referred to by the thread argument, by which your code refers to 
the new thread. A thread can also get its own identifier using the pthread_self 
function. There is no way to find a thread's identifier unless either the creator or 
the thread itself stores the identifier somewhere. You need to have a thread's 
identifier to do anything to the thread. If you'll need to know when a thread com- 
pletes, for example, you must keep the identifier somewhere. 
Pthreads provides the pthread_equal function to compare two thread identifi- 
ers. You can only test for equality. It doesn't make any sense to ask whether one 
thread identifier is "greater than" or "less than" another, because there is no 
ordering between threads. The pthread_equal function returns a nonzero value 
if the thread identifiers refer to the same thread, and the value 0 if they do not 
refer to the same thread. 
The initial thread (main) is special. 
Creating and using threads 37 
When a C program runs, it begins in a special function named main. In a 
threaded program, this special stream of execution is called the "initial thread" or 
sometimes the "main thread." You can do anything within the initial thread that 
you can do within any other thread. It can determine its own thread identifier by 
calling pthread_self, for example, or terminate itself by calling pthread_exit. If 
the initial thread stores its thread identifier somewhere accessible to another 
thread, that thread can wait for the initial thread to terminate, or detach the ini- 
tial thread. 
The initial thread is special because Pthreads retains traditional UNIX process 
behavior when the function main returns; that is, the process terminates without 
allowing other threads to complete. In general, you do not want to do this in a 
threaded program, but sometimes it can be convenient. In many of the programs 
in this book, for example, threads are created that have no effect on anything 
outside the process. It doesn't really matter what those threads are doing, then, if 
the process goes away. When the process exits, those threads, all their states, 
and anything they might accomplish, simply "evaporate"！there's no reason to 
clean up. 
I Detaching a thread that is still running doesn't affect the thread in any 
way！it just informs the system that the thread's resources can be 
reclaimed when the thread eventually terminates. 
Although "thread evaporation" is sometimes useful, most of the time your pro- 
cess will outlive the individual threads you create. To be sure that resources used 
by terminated threads are available to the process, you should always detach 
each thread you create when you're finished with it. Threads that have termi- 
nated but are not detached may retain virtual memory, including their stacks, as 
well as other system resources. Detaching a thread tells the system that you no 
longer need that thread, and allows the system to reclaim the resources it has 
allocated to the thread. 
If you create a thread that you will never need to control, you can use an 
attribute to create the thread so that it is already detached. (We'll get to attributes 
later, in Section 5.2.3.) If you do not want to wait for a thread that you created, 
and you know that you will no longer need to control that thread, you can detach 
it at any time by calling pthread_detach. A thread may detach itself, or any other 
thread that knows its pthread_t identifier may detach it at any time. If you need 
to know a thread's return value, or if you need to know when a thread has com- 
pleted, call pthread_join. The pthread_join function will block the caller until 
the thread you specify has terminated, and then, optionally, store the terminated 
thread's return value. Calling pthread_join detaches the specified thread 
automatically. 
As we've seen, threads within a process can execute different instructions, 
using different stacks, all at the same time. Although the threads execute inde- 
pendently of each other, they always share the same address space and file 
38 
CHAPTER 2 Threads 
descriptors. The shared address space provides an important advantage of the 
threaded programming model by allowing threads to communicate efficiently. 
Some programs may create threads that perform unrelated activities, but 
most often a set of threads works together toward a common goal. For example, 
one set of threads may form an assembly line in which each performs some spe- 
cific task on a shared data stream and then passes the data on to the next 
thread. A set of threads may form a work crew and divide independent parts of a 
common task. Or one "manager" thread may take control and divide work among 
a "crew" of worker threads. You can combine these models in a variety of ways; 
for example, a work crew might perform some complicated step in a pipeline, 
such as transforming a slice of an array. 
The following program, lifecycle.c, creates a thread. We'll refer to this sim- 
ple example in the following sections about a thread's life cycle. 
7-10 The thread function, thread_routine, returns a value to satisfy the standard 
thread function prototype. In this example the thread returns its argument, and 
the value is always null. 
18-25 The program creates a thread by calling pthread_create, and then waits for it 
by calling pthread_join. You don't need to wait for a thread, but if you don't, 
you'll need to do something else to make sure the process runs until the thread 
completes. Returning from main will cause the process to terminate, along with 
all threads. You could, for example, code the main thread to terminate by calling 
pthread_exit, which would allow the process to continue until all threads have 
terminated. 
26-29 When the join completes, the program checks the thread's return value, to be 
sure that the thread returned the value it was given. The program exits with 0 
(success) if the value is null, or with 1 otherwise. 
It is a good idea for all thread functions to return something, even if it is sim- 
ply null. If you omit the return statement, pthread_join will still return some 
value！whatever happens to be in the place where the thread's start function 
would have stored a return value (probably a register). 
lifecycle.c 
1 #include <pthread.h> 
2 #include "errors.h" 
3 
4 /* 
5 * Thread start routine. 
6 */ 
7 void *thread_routine (void *arg) 
8 { 
9 return arg; 
10 } 
11 
12 main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
13 { 
14 pthread_t thread_id; 
15 void *thread result; 
The life of a thread 39 
16 int status; 
17 
18 status = pthread_create ( 
19 &thread_id, NULL, thread_routine, NULL); 
20 if (status != 0) 
21 err_abort (status, "Create thread"); 
22 
23 status = pthread_join (thread_id, &thread_result); 
24 if (status != 0) 
25 err_abort (status, "Join thread"); 
26 if (thread_result == NULL) 
2 7 return 0; 
28 else 
29 return 1; 
30 } 
| lifecycle.c 
If the "joining" thread doesn't care about the return value, or if it knows that 
the "joinee" (the thread with which it is joining) didn't return a value, then it can 
pass NULL instead of sretval in the call to pthread_join. The joinee's return 
value will be ignored. 
When the call to pthread_join returns, the joinee has been detached and you 
can't join with it again. In the rare cases where more than one thread might need 
to know when some particular thread has terminated, the threads should wait on 
a condition variable instead of calling pthread_join. The terminating thread 
would store its return value (or any other information) in some known location, 
and broadcast the condition variable to wake all threads that might be interested. 
2.2 The life of a thread 
Come, listen, my men, while I tell you again 
The five unmistakable marks 
By which you may know, wheresoever you go, 
The warranted genuine Snarks. 
！Lewis Carroll, The Hunting of the Snark 
At any instant, a thread is in one of the four basic states described in Table 2.1. 
In implementations, you may see additional "states" that distinguish between 
various reasons for entering the four basic states. Digital UNIX, for example, repre- 
sents these finer distinctions as "substates," of which each state may have several. 
Whether they're called "substates" or additional states, "terminated" might be 
divided into "exited" and "cancelled"; "blocked" might be broken up into "blocked 
on condition variable," "blocked on mutex," "blocked in read," and so forth. 
40 
CHAPTER 2 Threads 
State 
Ready 
Running 
Blocked 
Terminated 
Meaning 
The thread is able to run, but is waiting for a processor. It may 
have just started, or just been unblocked, or preempted by anoth- 
er thread. 
The thread is currently running; on a multiprocessor there may be 
more than one running thread in the process. 
The thread is not able to run because it is waiting for something; 
for example, it may be waiting for a condition variable, or waiting 
to lock a mutex, or waiting for an I/O operation to complete. 
The thread has terminated by returning from its start function, 
calling pthread exit, or having been cancelled and completing all 
cleanup handlers. It was not detached, and has not yet been 
joined. Once it is detached or joined, it will be recycled. 
TABLE 2.1 Thread states 
These finer distinctions can be important in debugging and analyzing 
threaded programs. However, they do not add substantially to the basic under- 
standing of thread scheduling, and we will not deal with them here. 
Threads begin in the ready state. When the new thread runs it calls your 
specified thread start function. It may be preempted by other threads, or block 
itself to wait for external events any number of times. Eventually it completes and 
either returns from the thread start function or calls the pthread_exit function. 
In either case it terminates. If the thread has been detached, it is immediately 
recycled. (Doesn't that sound nicer than "destroyed"！and most systems reuse 
the resources to make new threads.) Otherwise the thread remains in the termi- 
nated state until joined or detached. Figure 2.1 shows the relationships between 
these thread states, and the events that cause threads to move from one state to 
another. 
2.2.1 Creation 
The "initial thread" of a process is created when the process is created. In a 
system that fully supports threaded programming, there's probably no way to 
execute any code without a thread. A thread is likely to be the only software con- 
text that includes the hardware state needed to execute code: registers, program 
counter, stack pointer, and so forth. 
Additional threads are created by explicit calls. The primary way to create 
threads on a Pthreads system is to call pthread_create. Threads may also be 
created when the process receives a POSIX signal if the process signal notify 
mechanism is set to sigev_thread. Your system may provide additional non- 
standard mechanisms to create a thread. 
The life of a thread 
41 
wait satisfied 
* ( blocked 
preempted 
created scheduled N. wait for resource 
done, or cancelled 
FIGURE 2.1 Thread state transitions 
When a new thread is created, its state is ready. Depending on scheduling 
constraints, it may remain in that state for a substantial period of time before 
executing. Section 5.5 contains more information on thread scheduling. Going 
back to lifecycle.c, the thread running thread_routine becomes ready during 
main's call to pthread_create, at line 18. 
The most important thing to remember about thread creation is that there is 
no synchronization between the creating thread's return from pthread_create 
and the scheduling of the new thread. That is, the thread may start before the 
creating thread returns. The thread may even run to completion and terminate 
before pthread_create returns. Refer to Section 8.1.1 for more information and 
warnings about what to expect when you create a thread. 
2.2.2 Startup 
Once a thread has been created, it will eventually begin executing machine 
instructions. The initial sequence of instructions will lead to the execution of the 
thread start/unction that you specified to pthread_create. The thread start func- 
tion is called with the argument value you specified when you created the thread. 
In lifecycle.c, for example, the thread begins executing user code at function 
thread_routine, with the formal parameter argument having a value of NULL. 
In the initial thread, the thread "start function" (main) is called from outside 
your program; for example, many UNIX systems link your program with a file 
called crtO.o, which initializes the process and then calls your main. This is a 
42 
CHAPTER 2 Threads 
minor implementation distinction, but it is important to remember because there 
are a few ways in which the initial thread is different. For one thing, main is called 
with different arguments than a thread start function: the program's argument 
array (argc and argv) instead of a single void* argument. For another thing, 
when a thread start function returns, the thread terminates but other threads 
continue to run. When the function main returns in the initial thread, the process 
will be terminated immediately. If you want to terminate the initial thread while 
allowing other threads in the process to continue running, call pthread_exit 
instead of returning from main. 
Another important difference to remember is that on most systems, the initial 
thread runs on the default process stack, which can grow to a substantial size. 
'Thread" stacks may be much more limited on some implementations, and the 
program will fail with a segmentation fault or bus error if a thread overflows its 
stack. 
2.2.3 Running and blocking 
Like us, threads usually can't stay awake their entire life. Most threads occa- 
sionally go to sleep. A thread can go to sleep because it needs a resource that is 
not available (it becomes "blocked") or because the system reassigned the proces- 
sor on which it was running (it is "preempted"). A thread spends most of its 
active life in three states: ready, running, and blocked. 
A thread is ready when it is first created, and whenever it is unblocked so that 
it is once again eligible to run. Ready threads are waiting for a processor. Also, 
when a running thread is preempted, for example, if it is timesliced (because it 
has run too long), the thread immediately becomes ready. 
A thread becomes running when it was ready and a processor selects the 
thread for execution. Usually this means that some other thread has blocked, or 
has been preempted by a timeslice！the blocking (or preempted) thread saves its 
context and restores the context of the next ready thread to replace itself. On a 
multiprocessor, however, a previously unused processor may execute a readied 
thread without any other thread blocking. 
A thread becomes blocked when it attempts to lock a mutex that is currently 
locked, when it waits on a condition variable, when it calls sigwait for a signal 
that is not currently pending, or when it attempts an I/O operation that cannot 
be immediately completed. A thread may also become blocked for other system 
operations, such as a page fault. 
When a thread is unblocked after a wait for some event, it is made ready 
again. It may execute immediately, for example, if a processor is available. In 
lifecycle.c, the main thread blocks at line 23, in pthread_join, to wait for the 
thread it created to run. If the thread had not already run at this point, it would 
move from ready to running when main becomes blocked. As the thread runs to 
completion and returns, the main thread will be unblocked！returning to the 
ready state. When processor resources are available, either immediately or after 
the thread becomes terminated, main will again become running, and complete. 
The life of a thread 43 
2.2.4 Termination 
A thread usually terminates by returning from its start function (the one you 
pass to the pthread_create function). The thread shown in lifecycle.c termi- 
nates by returning the value null, for example. Threads that call pthread_exit 
or that are cancelled using pthread_cancel also terminate after calling each 
cleanup handler that the thread registered by calling pthread_cleanup_push and 
that hasn't yet been removed by calling pthread_cleanup_pop. Cleanup handlers 
are discussed in Section 5.3.3. 
Threads may have private "thread-specific data" values (thread-specific data is 
discussed in Section 5.4). If the thread has any non-NULL thread-specific data 
values, the associated destructor functions for those keys (if any) are called. 
If the thread was already detached it moves immediately to the next section, 
recycling. Otherwise, the thread becomes terminated. It will remain available for 
another thread to join with it using pthread_join. This is analogous to a UNIX 
process that's terminated but hasn't yet been "reaped" by a wait operation. Some- 
times it is called a "zombie" because it still exists even though it is "dead." A 
zombie may retain most or all of the system resources that it used when running, 
so it is not a good idea to leave threads in this state for longer than necessary. 
Whenever you create a thread with which you won't need to join, you should use 
the detachstate attribute to create it "detached" (see Section 5.2.3). 
At a minimum, a terminated thread retains the identification (pthread_t 
value) and the void* return value that was returned from the thread's start func- 
tion or specified in a call to pthread_exit. The only external difference between a 
thread that terminated "normally" by returning or calling pthreadexit, and one 
that terminated through cancellation, is that a cancelled thread's return value is 
always pthread_cancelled. (This is why "cancelled" is not considered a distinct 
thread state.) 
If any other thread is waiting to join with the terminating thread, that thread 
is awakened. It will return from its call to pthread_join with the appropriate 
return value. Once pthread_join has extracted the return value, the terminated 
thread is detached by pthread_join, and may be recycled before the call to 
pthread_join returns. This means that, among other things, the returned value 
should never be a stack address associated with the terminated thread's stack！ 
the value at that address could be overwritten by the time the caller could use it. 
In lif ecycle. c, the main thread will return from the pthread_join call at line 23 
with the value NULL. 
I pthread_join is a convenience, not a rule. 
Even when you need a return value from a thread that you create, it is often at 
least as simple to create the thread detached and devise your own customized 
return mechanism as it is to use pthread_join. For example, if you pass infor- 
mation to a worker thread in some form of structure that another thread can find 
later, you might have the worker thread simply place the result in that same 
44 CHAPTER 2 Threads 
structure and broadcast a condition variable when done. The Pthreads context 
for the thread, including the thread identifier, can then be recycled immediately 
when the thread is done, and you still have the part you really need, the return 
value, where you can find it easily at any time. 
If pthread_join does exactly what you want, then by all means use it. But 
remember that it is nothing more than a convenience for the simplest and most 
limited model of communicating a thread's results. If it does not do exactly what 
you need, build your own return mechanism instead of warping your design to fit 
the limitations of pthread_join. 
2.2.5 Recycling 
If the thread was created with the detachstate attribute set to pthread_ 
create_detached (see Section 5.2.3), or if the thread or some other thread has 
already called pthread_detach for the thread's identifier, then the thread is 
immediately recycled when it becomes terminated. 
If the thread has not been detached when it terminates, it remains in the ter- 
minated state until the thread's pthread_t identifier is passed to pthread_detach 
or pthread_join. When either function returns, the thread cannot be accessed 
again. In lifecycle.c, for example, the thread that had run thread_routine will 
be recycled by the time the main thread returns from the pthread_join call at 
line 23. 
Recycling releases any system or process resources that weren't released at 
termination. That includes the storage used for the thread's return value, the 
stack, memory used to store register state, and so forth. Some of these resources 
may have been released at termination; it is important to remember that none of 
it should be accessed from any other thread after termination. For example, if a 
thread passes a pointer to its stack storage to another thread through shared 
data, you should treat that information as obsolete from the time the thread that 
owns the stack terminates. 
3 Synchronization 
"That's right!" said the Tiger-lily. "The daisies are worst of all. 
When one speaks, they all begin together, and it's 
enough to make one wither to hear the way they go on!" 
！Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking-Glass 
To write a program of any complexity using threads, you'll need to share data 
between threads, or cause various actions to be performed in some coherent 
order across multiple threads. To do this, you need to synchronize the activity of 
your threads. 
Section 3.1 describes a few of the basic terms we'll be using to talk about 
thread synchronization: critical section and invariant. 
Section 3.2 describes the basic Pthreads synchronization mechanism, the 
mutex. 
Section 3.3 describes the condition variable, a mechanism that your code can 
use to communicate changes to the state of invariants protected by a mutex. 
Section 3.4 completes this chapter on synchronization with some important 
information about threads and how they view the computer's memory. 
3.1 Invariants, critical sections, and predicates 
"/ know what you're thinking about," 
said Tweedledum; "but it isn't so, nohow." 
"Contrariwise," continued Tweedledee, 
"if it was so, it might be; and if it were so, it would be; 
but as it isn't, it ain't. That's logic." 
！Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking-Glass 
Invariants are assumptions made by a program, especially assumptions about 
the relationships between sets of variables. When you build a queue package, for 
example, you need certain data. Each queue has a queue header, which is a 
pointer to the first queued data element. Each data element includes a pointer to 
the next data element. But the data isn't all that's important！your queue pack- 
age relies on relationships between that data. The queue header, for example, 
45 
46 CHAPTER 3 Synchronization 
must either be null or contain a pointer to the first queued data element. Each 
data element must contain a pointer to the next data element, or NULL if it is the 
last. Those relationships are the invariants of your queue package. 
It is hard to write a program that doesn't have invariants, though many of 
them are subtle. When a program encounters a broken invariant, for example, if 
it dereferences a queue header containing a pointer to something that is not a 
valid data element, the program will probably produce incorrect results or fail 
immediately. 
Critical sections (also sometimes called "serial regions") are areas of code that 
affect a shared state. Since most programmers are trained to think about pro- 
gram functions instead of program data, you may well find it easier to recognize 
critical sections than data invariants. However, a critical section can almost 
always be translated into a data invariant, and vice versa. When you remove an 
element from a queue, for example, you can see the code performing the removal 
as a critical section, or you can see the state of the queue as an invariant. Which 
you see first may depend on how you're thinking about that aspect of your 
design. 
Most invariants can be "broken," and are routinely broken, during isolated 
areas of code. The trick is to be sure that broken invariants are always repaired 
before "unsuspecting" code can encounter them. That is a large part of what "syn- 
chronization" is all about in an asynchronous program. Synchronization protects 
your program from broken invariants. If your code locks a mutex whenever it 
must (temporarily) break an invariant, then other threads that rely on the invari- 
ant, and which also lock the mutex, will be delayed until the mutex is unlocked！ 
when the invariant has been restored. 
Synchronization is voluntary, and the participants must cooperate for the sys- 
tem to work. The programmers must agree not to fight for (or against) possession 
of the bailing bucket. The bucket itself does not somehow magically ensure that 
one and only one programmer bails at any time. Rather, the bucket is a reliable 
shared token that, if used properly, can allow the programmers to manage their 
resources effectively. 
"Predicates" are logical expressions that describe the state of invariants 
needed by your code. In English, predicates can be expressed as statements like 
"the queue is empty" or "the resource is available." A predicate may be a boolean 
variable with a true or false value, or it may be the result of testing whether a 
pointer is null. A predicate may also be a more complicated expression, such as 
determining whether a counter is greater than some threshold. A predicate may 
even be a value returned from some function. For example, you might call select 
or poll to determine whether a file is ready for input. 
Mutexes 47 
3.2 Mutexes 
"How are you getting on?" said the Cat, 
as soon as there was mouth enough for it to speak with. 
Alice waited till the eyes appeared, and then nodded. 
"It's no use speaking to it," she thought, 
"till its ears have come, or at least one of them." 
！Lewis Carroll, Alice's Adventures in Wonderland 
Most threaded programs need to share some data between threads. There may 
be trouble if two threads try to access shared data at the same time, because one 
thread may be in the midst of modifying some data invariant while another acts 
on the data as if it were consistent. This section is all about protecting the pro- 
gram from that sort of trouble. 
The most common and general way to synchronize between threads is to 
ensure that all memory accesses to the same (or related) data are "mutually 
exclusive." That means that only one thread is allowed to write at a time！others 
must wait for their turn. Pthreads provides mutual exclusion using a special 
form of Edsger Dijkstra's semaphore [Dijkstra, 1968a], called a mutex. The word 
mutex is a clever combination of "mut" from the word "mutual" and "ex" from the 
word "exclusion." 
Experience has shown that it is easier to use mutexes correctly than it is to 
use other synchronization models such as a more general semaphore. It is also 
easy to build any synchronization models using mutexes in combination with 
condition variables (we'll meet them at the next corner, in Section 3.3). Mutexes 
are simple, flexible, and can be implemented efficiently. 
The programmers' bailing bucket is something like a mutex (Figure 3.1). Both 
are "tokens" that can be handed around, and used to preserve the integrity of the 
concurrent system. The bucket can be thought of as protecting the bailing critical 
section！each programmer accepts the responsibility of bailing while holding the 
bucket, and of avoiding interference with the current bailer while not holding the 
bucket. Or, the bucket can be thought of as protecting the invariant that water 
can be removed by only one programmer at any time. 
Synchronization isn't important just when you modify data. You also need 
synchronization when a thread needs to read data that was written by another 
thread, if the order in which the data was written matters. As we'll see a little 
later, in Section 3.4, many hardware systems don't guarantee that one processor 
will see shared memory accesses in the same order as another processor without 
a "nudge" from software. 
48 
CHAPTER 3 Synchronization 
FIGURE 3.1 Mutex analogy 
Consider, for example, a thread that writes new data to an element in an 
array, and then updates a max_index variable to indicate that the array element 
is valid. Now consider another thread, running simultaneously on another pro- 
cessor, that steps through the array performing some computation on each valid 
element. If the second thread "sees" the new value of max_index before it sees the 
new value of the array element, the computation would be incorrect. This may 
seem irrational, but memory systems that work this way can be substantially 
faster than memory systems that guarantee predictable ordering of memory 
accesses. A mutex is one general solution to this sort of problem. If each thread 
locks a mutex around the section of code that's using shared data, only one 
thread will be able to enter the section at a time. 
Figure 3.2 shows a timing diagram of three threads sharing a mutex. Sections 
of the lines that are above the rounded box labeled "mutex" show where the asso- 
ciated thread does not own the mutex. Sections of the lines that are below the 
center line of the box show where the associated thread owns the mutex, and sec- 
tions of the lines hovering above the center line show where the thread is waiting 
to own the mutex. 
Initially, the mutex is unlocked. Thread 1 locks the mutex and, because there 
is no contention, it succeeds immediately！thread l's line moves below the center 
Mutexes 
49 
thread 2 waits 
thread 1 locks -. 
thread 2 
thread 3 
mutex 
V 
. 
.... 
/ 
thread 1 unlocks ' 
thread 2 locks - 
- thread 3 waits 
thread 1 tries to lock, 
J~ returns ebusy 
., ' 
！ 
f \^ J 
\ ^！！ thread 3 locks 
>- thread 2 unlocks 
FIGURE 3.2 Mutex operation 
of the box. Thread 2 then attempts to lock the mutex and, because the mutex is 
already locked, thread 2 blocks, its line remaining above the center line. Thread 1 
unlocks the mutex, unblocking thread 2, which then succeeds in locking the 
mutex. Slightly later, thread 3 attempts to lock the mutex, and blocks. Thread 1 
calls pthread_mutex_trylock to try to lock the mutex and, because the mutex is 
locked, returns immediately with EBUSY status. Thread 2 unlocks the mutex, 
which unblocks thread 3 so that it can lock the mutex. Finally, thread 3 unlocks 
the mutex to complete our example. 
3.2.1 Creating and destroying a mutex 
pthread_mutex_t mutex = PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER; 
int pthread_mutex_init ( 
pthread_mutex_t *mutex, pthread_mutexattr_t *attr); 
int pthread_mutex_destroy (pthread_mutex_t *mutex); 
A mutex is represented in your program by a variable of type pthread_mutex_t. 
You should never make a copy of a mutex, because the result of using a copied 
mutex is undefined. You can, however, freely copy a pointer to a mutex so that 
various functions and threads can use it for synchronization. 
50 CHAPTER 3 Synchronization 
Most of the time you'll probably declare mutexes using extern or static stor- 
age class, at "file scope," that is, outside of any function. They should have 
"normal" (extern) storage class if they are used by other files, or static storage 
class if used only within the file that declares the variable. When you declare a 
static mutex that has default attributes, you should use the pthread_mutex_ 
INITIALIZER macro, as shown in the mutex_static.c program shown next. (You 
can build and run this program, but don't expect anything interesting to happen, 
since main is empty.) 
| mutex_static.c 
1 #include <pthread.h> 
2 #include "errors.h" 
3 
4 /* 
5 * Declare a structure, with a mutex, statically initialized. This 
6 * is the same as using pthread_mutex_init, with the default 
7 * attributes. 
8 */ 
9 typedef struct my_struct_tag { 
10 pthread_mutex_t mutex; /* Protects access to value */ 
11 int value; /* Access protected by mutex */ 
12 } my_struct_t; 
13 
14 my_struct_t data = {PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER, 0}; 
15 
16 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
17 { 
18 return 0; 
19 } 
| mutex_static.c 
Often you cannot initialize a mutex statically, for example, when you use 
malloc to create a structure that contains a mutex. Then you will need to call 
pthread_mutex_init to initialize the mutex dynamically, as shown in mutex_ 
dynamic.c, the next program. You can also dynamically initialize a mutex that 
you declare statically！but you must ensure that each mutex is initialized before 
it is used, and that each is initialized only once. You may initialize it before creat- 
ing any threads, for example, or by calling pthread_once (Section 5.1). Also, if 
you need to initialize a mutex with nondefault attributes, you must use dynamic 
initialization (see Section 5.2.1). 
| mutex_dynamic.c 
1 #include <pthread.h> 
2 tinclude "errors.h" 
3 
Mutexes 51 
4 /* 
5 * Define a structure, with a mutex. 
6 */ 
7 typedef struct my_struct_tag { 
8 pthread_mutex_t mutex; /* Protects access to value */ 
9 int value; /* Access protected by mutex */ 
10 } my_struct_t; 
U 
12 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
13 { 
14 my_struct_t *data; 
15 int status; 
16 
17 data = malloc (sizeof (my_struct_t)); 
18 if (data == NULL) 
19 errno_abort ("Allocate structure"); 
20 status = pthread_mutex_init (&data->mutex, NULL); 
21 if (status != 0) 
22 err_abort (status, "Init mutex"); 
23 status = pthread_mutex_destroy (&data->mutex); 
24 if (status != 0) 
25 err_abort (status, "Destroy mutex"); 
26 (void)free (data); 
27 return status; 
28 } 
| mutex_dynamic.c 
It is a good idea to associate a mutex clearly with the data it protects, if possi- 
ble, by keeping the definition of the mutex and data together. In mutex_static.c 
and mutex_dynamic.c, for example, the mutex and the data it protects are 
defined in the same structure, and line comments document the association. 
When you no longer need a mutex that you dynamically initialized by calling 
pthread_mutex_init, you should destroy the mutex by calling pthread_mutex_ 
destroy. You do not need to destroy a mutex that was statically initialized using 
the PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER macro. 
I You can destroy a mutex as soon as you are sure no threads are 
blocked on the mutex. 
It is safe to destroy a mutex when you know that no threads can be blocked on 
the mutex, and no additional threads will try to lock the mutex. The best way to 
know this is usually within a thread that has just unlocked the mutex, when pro- 
gram logic ensures that no threads will try to lock the mutex later. When a thread 
locks a mutex within some heap data structure to remove the structure from a 
list and free the storage, for example, it is safe (and a good idea) to unlock and 
destroy the mutex before freeing the storage that the mutex occupies. 
52 CHAPTER 3 Synchronization 
3.2.2 Locking and unlocking a mutex 
int pthread_mutex_lock (pthread_mutex_t *mutex); 
int pthread_mutex_trylock (pthread_mutex_t *mutex); 
int pthread_mutex_unlock (pthread_mutex_t *mutex); 
In the simplest case, using a mutex is easy. You lock the mutex by calling 
either pthread_mutex_lock or pthread_mutex_trylock, do something with the 
shared data, and then unlock the mutex by calling pthread_mutex_unlock. To 
make sure that a thread can read consistent values for a series of variables, you 
need to lock your mutex around any section of code that reads or writes those 
variables. 
You cannot lock a mutex when the calling thread already has that mutex 
locked. The result of attempting to do so may be an error return, or it may be a 
self-deadlock, with the unfortunate thread waiting forever for itself to unlock the 
mutex. (If you have access to a system supporting the UNIX98 thread extensions, 
you can create mutexes of various types, including recursive mutexes, which 
allow a thread to relock a mutex it already owns. The mutex type attribute is dis- 
cussed in Section 10.1.2.) 
The following program, alarm_mutex.c, is an improved version of alarm_ 
thread.c (from Chapter 1). It lines up multiple alarm requests in a single "alarm 
server" thread. 
12-17 The alarm_t structure now contains an absolute time, as a standard UNIX 
time_t, which is the number of seconds from the UNIX Epoch (Jan 1 1970 00:00) 
to the expiration time. This is necessary so that alarm_t structures can be sorted 
by "expiration time" instead of merely by the requested number of seconds. In 
addition, there is a link member to connect the list of alarms. 
19-20 The alarm_mutex mutex coordinates access to the list head for alarm 
requests, called alarm_list. The mutex is statically initialized using default 
attributes, with the pthread_mutex_initializer macro. The list head is initial- 
ized to null, or empty. 
| alarm_mutex.c part 1 definitions 
1 #include <pthread.h> 
2 #include <time.h> 
3 #include "errors.h" 
4 
5 /* 
6 * The "alarm" structure now contains the time_t (time since the 
7 * Epoch, in seconds) for each alarm, so that they can be 
8 * sorted. Storing the requested number of seconds would not be 
9 * enough, since the "alarm thread" cannot tell how long it has 
10 * been on the list. 
11 */ 
Mutexes 53 
12 typedef struct alarm_tag { 
13 struct alarm_tag *link; 
14 int seconds; 
15 time_t time; /* seconds from EPOCH */ 
16 char message[64]; 
17 } alarm_t; 
18 
19 pthread_mutex_t alarm_mutex = PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER; 
20 alarm_t *alarm_list = NULL; 
| alarm_mutex.c part 1 definitions 
The code for the alarm_thread function follows. This function is run as a 
thread, and processes each alarm request in order from the list alarm_list. The 
thread never terminates！when main returns, the thread simply "evaporates." 
The only consequence of this is that any remaining alarms will not be delivered！ 
the thread maintains no state that can be seen outside the process. 
If you would prefer that the program process all outstanding alarm requests 
before exiting, you can easily modify the program to accomplish this. The main 
thread must notify alarm_thread, by some means, that it should terminate when 
it finds the alarm_list empty. You could, for example, have main set a new global 
variable alarm_done and then terminate using pthread_exit rather than exit. 
When alarm_thread finds alarm_list empty and alarm_done set, it would 
immediately call pthread_exit rather than waiting for a new entry. 
29-30 If there are no alarms on the list, alarm_thread needs to block itself, with the 
mutex unlocked, at least for a short time, so that main will be able to add a new 
alarm. It does this by setting sleep_time to one second. 
31-42 If an alarm is found, it is removed from the list. The current time is retrieved 
by calling the time function, and it is compared to the requested time for the 
alarm. If the alarm has already expired, then alarm_thread will set sleep_time 
to 0. If the alarm has not expired, alarm_thread computes the difference between 
the current time and the alarm expiration time, and sets sleep_time to that 
number of seconds. 
52-58 The mutex is always unlocked before sleeping or yielding. If the mutex 
remained locked, then main would be unable to insert a new alarm on the list. 
That would make the program behave synchronously！the user would have to 
wait until the alarm expired before doing anything else. (The user would be able 
to enter a single command, but would not receive another prompt until the next 
alarm expired.) Calling sleep blocks alarm_thread for the required period of 
time！it cannot run until the timer expires. 
Calling sched_yield instead is slightly different. We'll describe sched_yield 
in detail later (in Section 5.5.2)！for now, just remember that calling sched_yield 
will yield the processor to a thread that is ready to run, but will return immedi- 
ately if there are no ready threads. In this case, it means that the main thread 
will be allowed to process a user command if there's input waiting！but if the 
user hasn't entered a command, sched yield will return immediately. 
54 CHAPTER 3 Synchronization 
64-67 If the alarm pointer is not null, that is, if an alarm was processed from 
alarm_list, the function prints a message indicating that the alarm has expired. 
After printing the message, it frees the alarm structure. The thread is now ready 
to process another alarm. 
| alarm_mutex.c part 2 alarm_thread 
1 /* 
2 * The alarm thread's start routine. 
3 */ 
4 void *alarm_thread (void *arg) 
5 { 
6 alarm_t *alarm; 
7 int sleep_time; 
8 time_t now; 
9 int status; 
10 
11 /* 
12 * Loop forever, processing commands. The alarm thread will 
13 * be disintegrated when the process exits. 
14 */ 
15 while A) { 
16 status = pthread_mutex_lock (&alarm_mutex); 
17 if (status != 0) 
18 err_abort (status, "Lock mutex"); 
19 alarm = alarm_list; 
20 
21 /* 
22 * If the alarm list is empty, wait for one second. This 
23 * allows the main thread to run, and read another 
24 * command. If the list is not empty, remove the first 
25 * item. Compute the number of seconds to wait ！ if the 
26 * result is less than 0 (the time has passed), then set 
27 * the sleep_time to 0. 
28 */ 
29 if (alarm == NULL) 
30 sleep_time = 1; 
31 else { 
32 alarm_list = alarm->link; 
33 now = time (NULL); 
34 if (alarm->time <= now) 
35 sleep_time = 0; 
36 else 
37 sleep_time = alarm->time - now; 
38 #ifdef DEBUG 
39 printf ("[waiting: %d(%d)\"%s\"]\n", alarm->time, 
40 sleep_time, alarm->message); 
41 #endif 
42 } 
43 
Mutexes 55 
44 /* 
45 * Unlock the mutex before waiting, so that the main 
46 * thread can lock it to insert a new alarm request. If 
47 * the sleep_time is 0, then call sched_yield, giving 
48 * the main thread a chance to run if it has been 
49 * readied by user input, without delaying the message 
50 * if there's no input. 
51 */ 
52 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (&alarm_mutex); 
53 if (status != 0) 
54 err_abort (status, "Unlock mutex"); 
55 if (sleep_time > 0) 
56 sleep (sleep_time); 
57 else 
58 sched_yield (); 
59 
60 /* 
61 * If a timer expired, print the message and free the 
62 * structure. 
63 */ 
64 if (alarm != NULL) { 
65 printf ("(%d) %s\n", alarm->seconds, alarm->message); 
66 free (alarm); 
67 } 
68 } 
69 } 
| alarm_mutex.c part 2 alarm_thread 
And finally, the code for the main program for alarnwnutex.c. The basic 
structure is the same as all of the other versions of the alarm program that we've 
developed！a loop, reading simple commands from stdin and processing each in 
turn. This time, instead of waiting synchronously as in alarm, c, or creating a 
new asynchronous entity to process each alarm command as in alarm_fork.c 
and alarm_thread.c, each request is queued to a server thread, alarm_thread. 
As soon as main has queued the request, it is free to read the next command. 
8-n Create the server thread that will process all alarm requests. Although we 
don't use it, the thread's ID is returned in local variable thread. 
13-28 Read and process a command, much as in any of the other versions of our 
alarm program. As in alarm_thread.c, the data is stored in a heap structure 
allocated by ma Hoc. 
30-32 The program needs to add the alarm request to alarm_list, which is shared 
by both alarm_thread and main. So we start by locking the mutex that synchro- 
nizes access to the shared data, alarm_mutex. 
33 Because alarm_thread processes queued requests, serially, it has no way of 
knowing how much time has elapsed between reading the command and process- 
ing it. Therefore, the alarm structure includes the absolute time of the alarm 
expiration, which we calculate by adding the alarm interval, in seconds, to the 
56 CHAPTER 3 Synchronization 
current number of seconds since the UNIX Epoch, as returned by the time 
function. 
39-49 The alarms are sorted in order of expiration time on the alarm_list queue. 
The insertion code searches the queue until it finds the first entry with a time 
greater than or equal to the new alarm's time. The new entry is inserted preced- 
ing the located entry. Because alarm_list is a simple linked list, the traversal 
maintains a current entry pointer (this) and a pointer to the previous entry's 
link member, or to the alarm_list head pointer (last). 
56-59 If no alarm with a time greater than or equal to the new alarm's time is found, 
then the new alarm is inserted at the end of the list. That is, if the alarm pointer 
is null on exit from the search loop (the last entry on the list always has a link 
pointer of null), the previous entry (or queue head) is made to point to the new 
entry. 
| alarm_mutex.c part 3 main 
1 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
2 { 
3 int status; 
4 char line[128]; 
5 alarm_t *alarm, **last, *next; 
6 pthread_t thread; 
7 
8 status = pthread_create ( 
9 Sthread, NULL, alarm_thread, NULL); 
10 if (status != 0) 
11 err_abort (status, "Create alarm thread"); 
12 while A) { 
13 printf ("alarm> "); 
14 if (fgets (line, sizeof (line), stdin) == NULL) exit @); 
15 if (strlen (line) <= 1) continue; 
16 alarm = (alarm_t*)malloc (sizeof (alarm_t)); 
17 if (alarm == NULL) 
18 errno_abort ("Allocate alarm"); 
19 
20 /* 
21 * Parse input line into seconds (%d) and a message 
22 * (%64[A\n]), consisting of up to 64 characters 
23 * separated from the seconds by whitespace. 
24 */ 
25 if (sscanf (line, "%d %64p\n]", 
26 &alarm->seconds, alarm->message) < 2) { 
27 fprintf (stderr, "Bad command\n"); 
28 free (alarm); 
29 } else { 
30 status = pthread_mutex_lock (&alarm_mutex); 
Mutexes 57 
31 if (status != 0) 
32 err_abort (status, "Lock mutex"); 
33 alarm->time = time (NULL) + alarm->seconds; 
34 
35 /* 
36 * Insert the new alarm into the list of alarms, 
37 * sorted by expiration time. 
38 */ 
39 last = &alarm_list; 
40 next = *last; 
41 while (next != NULL) { 
42 if (next->time >= alarm->time) { 
43 alarm->link = next; 
44 *last = alarm; 
45 break; 
46 } 
47 last = &next->link; 
48 next = next->link; 
49 } 
50 /* 
51 * If we reached the end of the list, insert the new 
52 * alarm there, ("next" is NULL, and "last" points 
53 * to the link field of the last item, or to the 
54 * list header). 
55 */ 
56 if (next == NULL) { 
57 *last = alarm; 
58 alarm->link = NULL; 
59 } 
60 #ifdef DEBUG 
61 printf ("[list: "); 
62 for (next = alarm_list; next != NULL; next = next->link) 
63 printf ("%d(%d)[\"%s\"] ", next->time, 
64 next->time - time (NULL), next->message); 
65 printf ("]\n"); 
66 #endif 
67 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (&alarm_mutex); 
68 if (status != 0) 
69 err_abort (status, "Unlock mutex"); 
70 } 
71 } 
72 } 
| alarm_mutex. c part 3 main 
This simple program has a few severe failings. Although it has the advantage, 
compared to alarm_f ork. c or alarm_thread. c, of using fewer resources, it is less 
responsive. Once alarm_thread has accepted an alarm request from the queue, it 
58 CHAPTER 3 Synchronization 
sleeps until that alarm expires. When it fails to find an alarm request on the list, 
it sleeps for a second anyway, to allow main to accept another alarm command. 
During all this sleeping, it will fail to notice any alarm requests added to the head 
of the queue by main, until it returns from sleep. 
This problem could be addressed in various ways. The simplest, of course, 
would be to go back to alarm_thread.c, where a thread was created for each 
alarm request. That wasn't so bad, since threads are relatively cheap. They're still 
not as cheap as the alarm_t data structure, however, and we'd like to make effi- 
cient programs！not just responsive programs. The best solution is to make use 
of condition variables for signaling changes in the state of shared data, so it 
shouldn't be a surprise that you'll be seeing one final version of the alarm pro- 
gram, alarm_cond.c, in Section 3.3.4. 
3.2.2.1 Nonlocking mutex locks 
When you lock a mutex by calling pthread_mutex_lock, the calling thread 
will block if the mutex is already locked. Normally, that's what you want. But 
occasionally you want your code to take some alternate path if the mutex is 
locked. Your program may be able to do useful work instead of waiting. Pthreads 
provides the pthread_mutex_trylock function, which will return an error status 
(ebusy) instead of blocking if the mutex is already locked. 
When you use a nonblocking mutex lock, be careful to unlock the mutex only 
if pthread_mutex_trylock returned with success status. Only the thread that 
owns a mutex may unlock it. An erroneous call to pthread_mutex_unlock may 
return an error, or it may unlock the mutex while some other thread relies on 
having it locked！and that will probably cause your program to break in ways 
that may be very difficult to debug. 
The following program, trylock.c, uses pthread_mutex_trylock to occasion- 
ally report the value of a counter！but only when its access does not conflict with 
the counting thread. 
4 This definition controls how long counter_thread holds the mutex while 
updating the counter. Making this number larger increases the chance that the 
pthread_mutex_trylock in monitor_thread will occasionally return EBUSY. 
14-39 The counter_thread wakes up approximately each second, locks the mutex, 
and spins for a while, incrementing counter. The counter is therefore increased 
by SPIN each second. 
46-72 The monitor_thread wakes up every three seconds, and tries to lock the 
mutex. If the attempt fails with ebusy, monitor_thread counts the failure and 
waits another three seconds. If the pthread_mutex_trylock succeeds, then 
monitor_thread prints the current value of counter (scaled by SPIN). 
80-88 On Solaris 2.5, call thr_setconcurrency to set the thread concurrency level 
to 2. This allows the counter_thread and monitor_thread to run concurrently 
on a uniprocessor. Otherwise, monitor_thread would not run until counter_ 
thread terminated. 
Mutexes 59 
| trylock.c 
1 #include <pthread.h> 
2 #include "errors.h" 
3 
4 tdefine SPIN 10000000 
5 
6 pthread_mutex_t mutex = PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER; 
7 long counter; 
8 time_t end_time; 
9 
10 /* 
11 * Thread start routine that repeatedly locks a mutex and 
12 * increments a counter. 
13 */ 
14 void *counter_thread (void *arg) 
15 { 
16 int status; 
17 int spin; 
18 
19 /* 
20 * Until end_time, increment the counter each second. Instead of 
21 * just incrementing the counter, it sleeps for another second 
22 * with the mutex locked, to give monitor_thread a reasonable 
23 * chance of running. 
24 */ 
25 while (time (NULL) < end_time) 
26 { 
27 status = pthread_mutex_lock (Smutex); 
28 if (status != 0) 
29 err_abort (status, "Lock mutex"); 
30 for (spin = 0; spin < SPIN; spin++) 
31 counter++; 
32 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (Smutex); 
33 if (status != 0) 
34 err_abort (status, "Unlock mutex"); 
35 sleep A); 
36 } 
37 printf ("Counter is %#lx\n", counter); 
38 return NULL; 
39 } 
40 
41 /* 
42 * Thread start routine to "monitor" the counter. Every 3 
43 * seconds, try to lock the mutex and read the counter. If the 
44 * trylock fails, skip this cycle. 
45 */ 
46 void *monitor thread (void *arg) 
60 CHAPTER 3 Synchronizatton 
47 { 
48 int status; 
49 int misses = 0; 
50 
51 
52 /* 
53 * Loop until end_time, checking the counter every 3 seconds. 
54 */ 
55 while (time (NULL) < end_time) 
56 { 
57 sleep C); 
58 status = pthread_mutex_trylock (Smutex); 
59 if (status != EBUSY) 
60 { 
61 if (status != 0) 
62 err_abort (status, "Trylock mutex"); 
63 printf ("Counter is %ld\n", counter/SPIN); 
64 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (smutex); 
65 if (status != 0) 
66 err_abort (status, "Unlock mutex"); 
67 } else 
68 misses++; /* Count "misses" on the lock */ 
69 } 
70 printf ("Monitor thread missed update %d times.\n", misses); 
71 return NULL; 
72 } 
73 
74 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
75 { 
76 int status; 
77 pthread_t counter_thread_id; 
78 pthread_t monitor_thread_id; 
79 
80 #ifdef sun 
81 /* 
82 * On Solaris 2.5, threads are not timesliced. To ensure 
83 * that our threads can run concurrently, we need to 
84 * increase the concurrency level to 2. 
85 */ 
86 DPRINTF (("Setting concurrency level to 2\n")); 
87 thr_setconcurrency B); 
88 #endif 
89 
90 end_time = time (NULL) + 60; /* Run for 1 minute */ 
91 status = pthread_create ( 
92 &counter_thread_id, NULL, counter_thread, NULL); 
93 if (status != 0) 
94 err abort (status, "Create counter thread"); 
Mutexes 61 
95 status = pthread_create ( 
96 &monitor_thread_id, NULL, monitor_thread, NULL); 
97 if (status != 0) 
98 err_abort (status, "Create monitor thread"); 
99 status = pthread_join (counter_thread_id, NULL); 
100 if (status != 0) 
101 err_abort (status, "Join counter thread"); 
102 status = pthread_join (monitor_thread_id, NULL); 
103 if (status != 0) 
104 err_abort (status, "Join monitor thread"); 
105 return 0; 
106 } 
| trylock.c 
3.2.3 Using mutexes for atomicity 
Invariants, as we saw in Section 3.1, are statements about your program that 
must always be true. But we also saw that invariants probably aren't always 
true, and many can't be. To be always true, data composing an invariant must be 
modified atomically. Yet it is rarely possible to make multiple changes to a pro- 
gram state atomically. It may not even be possible to guarantee that a single 
change is made atomically, without substantial knowledge of the hardware and 
architecture and control over the executed instructions. 
"Atomic" means indivisible. But most of the time, we just mean 
that threads don't see things that would confuse them. 
Although some hardware will allow you to set an array element and increment 
the array index in a single instruction that cannot be interrupted, most won't. 
Most compilers don't let you control the code to that level of detail even if the 
hardware can do it, and who wants to write in assembler unless it is really impor- 
tant? And, more importantly, most interesting invariants are more complicated 
than that. 
By "atomic," we really mean only that other threads can't accidentally find 
invariants broken (in intermediate and inconsistent states), even when the 
threads are running simultaneously on separate processors. There are two basic 
ways to do that when the hardware doesn't support making the operation indi- 
visible and noninterruptable. One is to detect that you're looking at a broken 
invariant and try again, or reconstruct the original state. That's hard to do reli- 
ably unless you know a lot about the processor architecture and are willing to 
design nonportable code. 
When there is no way to enlist true atomicity in your cause, you need to create 
your own synchronization. Atomicity is nice, but synchronization will do just as 
well in most cases. So when you need to update an array element and the index 
variable atomically, just perform the operation while a mutex is locked. 
62 CHAPTER 3 Synchronization 
Whether or not the store and increment operations are performed indivisibly 
and noninterruptably by the hardware, you know that no cooperating thread can 
peek until you're done. The transaction is, for all practical purposes, "atomic." 
The key, of course, is the word "cooperating." Any thread that is sensitive to the 
invariant must use the same mutex before modifying or examining the state of 
the invariant. 
3.2.4 Sizing a mutex to fit the job 
How big is a mutex? No, I don't mean the amount of memory consumed by a 
pthread_mutex_t structure. I'm talking about a colloquial and completely inac- 
curate meaning that happens to make sense to most people. This colorful usage 
became common during discussions about modifying existing nonthreaded code 
to be thread-safe. One relatively simple way to make a library thread-safe is to 
create a single mutex, lock it on each entry to the library, and unlock it on each 
exit from the library. The library becomes a single serial region, preventing any 
conflict between threads. The mutex protecting this big serial region came to be 
referred to as a "big" mutex, clearly larger in some metaphysical sense than a 
mutex that protects only a few lines of code. 
By irrelevant but inevitable extension, a mutex that protects two variables 
must be "bigger" than a mutex protecting only a single variable. So we can ask, 
"How big should a mutex be?" And we can answer only, "As big as necessary, but 
no bigger." 
When you need to protect two shared variables, you have two basic strategies: 
You can assign a small mutex to each variable, or assign a single larger mutex to 
both variables. Which is better will depend on a lot of factors. Furthermore, the 
factors will probably change during development, depending on how many 
threads need the data and how they use it. 
These are the main design factors: 
1. Mutexes aren't free. It takes time to lock them, and time to unlock them. 
Therefore, code that locks fewer mutexes will usually run faster than code 
that locks more mutexes. So use as few as practical, each protecting as 
much as makes sense. 
2. Mutexes, by their nature, serialize execution. If a lot of threads frequently 
need to lock a single mutex, the threads will spend most of their time wait- 
ing. That's bad for performance. If the pieces of data (or code) protected by 
the mutex are unrelated, you can often improve performance by splitting 
the big mutex into several smaller mutexes. Fewer threads will need the 
smaller mutexes at any time, so they'll spend less time waiting. So use as 
many as makes sense, each protecting as little as is practical. 
3. Items 1 and 2 conflict. But that's nothing new or unique, and you can deal 
with it once you understand what's going on. 
Mutexes 63 
In a complicated program it will usually take some experimentation to get the 
right balance. Your code will be simpler in most cases if you start with large 
mutexes and then work toward smaller mutexes as experience and performance 
data show where the heavy contention happens. Simple is good. Don't spend too 
much time optimizing until you know there's a problem. 
On the other hand, in cases where you can tell from the beginning that the 
algorithms will make heavy contention inevitable, don't oversimplify. Your job will 
be a lot easier if you start with the necessary mutexes and data structure design 
rather than adding them later. You will get it wrong sometimes, because, espe- 
cially when you are working on your first major threaded project, your intuition 
will not always be correct. Wisdom, as they say, comes from experience, and 
experience comes from lack of wisdom. 
3.2.5 Using more than one mutex 
Sometimes one mutex isn't enough. This happens when your code "crosses 
over" some boundary within the software architecture. For example, when multi- 
ple threads will access a queue data structure at the same time, you may need a 
mutex to protect the queue header and another to protect data within a queue 
element. When you build a tree structure for threaded programming, you may 
need a mutex for each node in the tree. 
Complications can arise when using more than one mutex at the same time. 
The worst is deadlock！when each of two threads holds one mutex and needs the 
other to continue. More subtle problems such as priority inversion can occur when 
you combine mutexes with priority scheduling. For more information on deadlock, 
priority inversion, and other synchronization problems, refer to Section 8.1. 
3.2.5.1 Lock hierarchy 
If you can apply two separate mutexes to completely independent data, do it. 
You'll almost always win in the end by reducing the time when a thread has to 
wait for another thread to finish with data that this thread doesn't even need. 
And if the data is independent you're unlikely to run into many cases where a 
given function will need to lock both mutexes. 
The complications arise when data isn't completely independent. If you have 
some program invariant！even one that's rarely changed or referenced！that 
affects data protected by two mutexes, sooner or later you'll need to write code 
that must lock both mutexes at the same time to ensure the integrity of that 
invariant. If one thread locks mutex_a and then locks mutex_b, while another 
thread locks mutex_b and then mutex_a, you've coded a classic deadlock, as 
shown in Table 3.1. 
64 
First thread 
pthread mutex 
pthread mutex 
_lock 
lock 
(Smutex a); 
(Smutex b); 
Second thread 
pthread mutex 
pthread mutex 
CHAPTER 3 Synchronization 
lock 
"lock 
(Smutex 
(Smutex 
b); 
.a); 
TABLE 3.1 Mutex deadlock 
Both of the threads shown in Table 3.1 may complete the first step about the 
same time. Even on a uniprocessor, a thread might complete the first step and 
then be timesliced (preempted by the system), allowing the second thread to com- 
plete its first step. Once this has happened, neither of them can ever complete the 
second step because each thread needs a mutex that is already locked by the 
other thread. 
Consider these two common solutions to this type of deadlock: 
? Fixed locking hierarchy: All code that needs both mutex_a and mutex_b 
must always lock mutex_a first and then mutex_b. 
? Try and back off: After locking the first mutex of some set (which can be 
allowed to block), use pthread_mutex_trylock to lock additional mutexes 
in the set. If an attempt fails, release all mutexes in the set and start again. 
There are any number of ways to define a fixed locking hierarchy. Sometimes 
there's an obvious hierarchical order to the mutexes anyway, for example, if one 
mutex controls a queue header and one controls an element on the queue, you'll 
probably have to have the queue header locked by the time you need to lock the 
queue element anyway. 
When there's no obvious logical hierarchy, you can create an arbitrary hierar- 
chy; for example, you could create a generic "lock a set of mutexes" function that 
sorts a list of mutexes in order of their identifier address and locks them in that 
order. Or you could assign them names and lock them in alphabetical order, or 
integer sequence numbers and lock them in numerical order. 
To some extent, the order doesn't really matter as long as it is always the 
same. On the other hand, you will rarely need to lock "a set of mutexes" at one 
time. Function A will need to lock mutex 1, and then call function B, which needs 
to also lock mutex 2. If the code was designed with a functional locking hierarchy, 
you will usually find that mutex 1 and mutex 2 are being locked in the proper 
order, that is, mutex 1 is locked first and then mutex 2. If the code was designed 
with an arbitrary locking order, especially an order not directly controlled by the 
code, such as sorting pointers to mutexes initialized in heap structures, you may 
find that mutex 2 should have been locked before mutex 1. 
If the code invariants permit you to unlock mutex 1 safely at this point, you 
would do better to avoid owning both mutexes at the same time. That is, unlock 
mutex 1, and then lock mutex 2. If there is a broken invariant that requires 
mutex 1 to be owned, then mutex 1 cannot be released until the invariant is 
restored. If this situation is possible, you should consider using a backoff (or "try 
and back off) algorithm. 
"Backoff means that you lock the first mutex normally, but any additional 
mutexes in the set that are required by the thread are locked conditionally by 
Mutexes 65 
calling pthread_mutex_trylock. If pthread_mutex_trylock returns EBUSY, indi- 
cating that the mutex is already locked, you must unlock all of the mutexes in the 
set and start over. 
The backoff solution is less efficient than a fixed hierarchy. You may waste a 
lot of time trying and backing off. On the other hand, you don't need to define and 
follow strict locking hierarchy conventions, which makes backoff more flexible. 
You can use the two techniques in combination to minimize the cost of backing 
off. Follow some fixed hierarchy for well-defined areas of code, but apply a backoff 
algorithm where a function needs to be more flexible. 
The program below, backoff .c, demonstrates how to avoid mutex deadlocks 
by applying a backoff algorithm. The program creates two threads, one running 
function lock_f orward and the other running function lock_backward. The two 
threads loop iterations times, each iteration attempting to lock all of three 
mutexes in sequence. The lock_f orward thread locks mutex 0, then mutex 1, 
then mutex 2, while lock_backward locks the three mutexes in the opposite 
order. Without special precautions, this design will always deadlock quickly 
(except on a uniprocessor system with a sufficiently long timeslice that either 
thread can complete before the other has a chance to run). 
15 You can see the deadlock by running the program as backoff 0. The first 
argument is used to set the backoff variable. If backoff is 0, the two threads will 
use pthread_mutex_lock to lock each mutex. Because the two threads are start- 
ing from opposite ends, they will crash in the middle, and the program will hang. 
When backoff is nonzero (which it is unless you specify an argument), the 
threads use pthread_mutex_trylock, which enables the backoff algorithm. When 
the mutex lock fails with ebusy, the thread will release all mutexes it currently 
owns, and start over. 
16 It is possible that, on some systems, you may not see any mutex collisions, 
because one thread is always able to lock all mutexes before the other thread has 
a chance to lock any. You can resolve that problem by setting the yield_f lag 
variable, which you do by running the program with a second argument, for 
example, backoff 1 1. When yield_f lag is 0, which it is unless you specify a sec- 
ond argument, each thread's mutex locking loop may run uninterrupted, 
preventing a deadlock (at least, on a uniprocessor). When yield_f lag has a value 
greater than 0, however, the threads will call sched_yield after locking each 
mutex, ensuring that the other thread has a chance to run. And if you set yield_ 
flag to a value less than 0, the threads will sleep for one second after locking 
each mutex, to be really sure the other thread has a chance to run. 
70-75 After locking all of the three mutexes, each thread reports success, and tells 
how many times it had to back off before succeeding. On a multiprocessor, or 
when you've set yield_f lag to a nonzero value, you'll usually see a lot more non- 
zero backoff counts. The thread unlocks all three mutexes, in the reverse order of 
locking, which helps to avoid unnecessary backoffs in other threads. Calling 
sched_yield at the end of each iteration "mixes things up" a little so one thread 
doesn't always start each iteration first. The sched_yield function is described in 
Section 5.5.2. 
66 CHAPTER 3 Synchronization 
| backoff.c 
1 #include <pthread.h> 
2 #include "errors.h" 
3 
4 #define ITERATIONS 10 
5 
6 /* 
7 * Initialize a static array of 3 mutexes. 
8 */ 
9 pthread_mutex_t mutex[3] = { 
10 PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER, 
11 PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER, 
12 PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER 
13 }; 
14 
15 int backoff = 1; /* Whether to backoff or deadlock */ 
16 int yield_flag =0; /* 0: no yield, >0: yield, <0: sleep */ 
17 
18 /* 
19 * This is a thread start routine that locks all mutexes in 
20 * order, to ensure a conflict with lock_reverse, which does the 
21 * opposite. 
22 */ 
23 void *lock_forward (void *arg) 
24 { 
25 int i, iterate, backoffs; 
26 int status; 
27 
28 for (iterate = 0; iterate < ITERATIONS; iterate++) { 
29 backoffs = 0; 
30 for (i = 0; i < 3; i++) { 
31 if (i == 0) { 
32 status = pthread_mutex_lock (Smutex[i]); 
33 if (status != 0) 
34 err_abort (status, "First lock"); 
35 } else { 
36 if (backoff) 
37 status = pthread_mutex_trylock (Smutex[i]); 
38 else 
39 status = pthread_mutex_lock (&mutex[i]); 
40 if (status == EBUSY) { 
41 backoffs++; 
42 DPRINTF (( 
43 " [forward locker backing off at %d]\n", 
44 i)); 
45 for (; i >= 0; i！) { 
46 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (Smutex[i]); 
47 if (status != 0) 
Mutexes 67 
48 err_abort (status, "Backoff"); 
49 } 
50 } else { 
51 if (status != 0) 
52 err_abort (status, "Lock mutex"); 
53 DPRINTF ((" forward locker got %d\n", i)); 
54 } 
55 } 
56 /* 
57 * Yield processor, if needed to be sure locks get 
58 * interleaved on a uniprocessor. 
59 */ 
60 if (yield_flag) { 
61 if (yield_flag > 0) 
62 sched_yield (); 
63 else 
64 sleep A); 
65 } 
66 } 
67 /* 
68 * Report that we got 'em, and unlock to try again. 
69 */ 
70 printf ( 
71 "lock forward got all locks, %d backoffs\n", backoffs); 
72 pthread_mutex_unlock (&mutex[2]); 
73 pthread_mutex_unlock (&mutex[1]); 
74 pthread_mutex_unlock (smutex[0]); 
75 sched_yield (); 
76 } 
77 return NULL; 
78 } 
79 
80 /* 
81 * This is a thread start routine that locks all mutexes in 
82 * reverse order, to ensure a conflict with lock_forward, which 
83 * does the opposite. 
84 */ 
85 void *lock_backward (void *arg) 
86 { 
87 int i, iterate, backoffs; 
88 int status; 
89 
90 for (iterate = 0; iterate < ITERATIONS; iterate++) { 
91 backoffs = 0; 
92 for (i = 2; i >= 0; i！) { 
93 if (i == 2) { 
94 status = pthread_mutex_lock (Smutex[i]); 
95 if (status != 0) 
96 err abort (status, "First lock"); 
68 
CHAPTER 3 Synchronization 
97 
98 
99 
100 
101 
102 
103 
104 
105 
106 
107 
108 
109 
110 
111 
112 
113 
114 
115 
116 
117 
118 
119 
120 
121 
122 
123 
124 
125 
126 
127 
128 
129 
130 
131 
132 
133 
134 
135 
136 
137 
138 
139 
140 
141 
142 
143 
144 
int 
} else { 
if (backoff) 
status = pthread_mutex_trylock (&mutex[i]); 
else 
status = pthread_mutex_lock (&mutex[i]); 
if (status == EBUSY) { 
backoffs++; 
DPRINTF (( 
" [backward locker backing off at %d]\n", 
i)); 
for (; i < 3; i++) { 
status = pthread_mutex_unlock (Smutex[i]); 
if (status != 0) 
err_abort (status, "Backoff"); 
} else { 
if (status != 0) 
err_abort (status, "Lock mutex"); 
DPRINTF ((" backward locker got %d\n", i)); 
/* 
* Yield processor, if needed to be sure locks get 
* interleaved on a uniprocessor. 
*/ 
if (yield_flag) { 
if (yield_flag > 0) 
sched_yield (); 
else 
sleep A); 
/* 
* Report that we got 'em, and unlock to try again. 
*/ 
printf ( 
"lock backward got all locks, %d backoffsXn", backoffs); 
pthread_mutex_unlock (&mutex[0]); 
pthread_mutex_unlock (&mutex[1]) 
pthread_mutex_unlock (Smutex[2]); 
sched_yield (); 
return NULL; 
main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
pthread_t forward, backward; 
Mutexes 69 
145 int status; 
146 
147 #ifdef sun 
148 /* 
149 * On Solaris 2.5, threads are not timesliced. To ensure 
150 * that our threads can run concurrently, we need to 
151 * increase the concurrency level. 
152 */ 
153 DPRINTF (("Setting concurrency level to 2\n")); 
154 thr_setconcurrency B); 
155 #endif 
156 
157 /* 
158 * If the first argument is absent, or nonzero, a backoff 
159 * algorithm will be used to avoid deadlock. If the first 
160 * argument is zero, the program will deadlock on a lock 
161 * "collision." 
162 */ 
163 if (argc > 1) 
164 backoff = atoi (argv[l]); 
165 
166 /* 
167 * If the second argument is absent, or zero, the two threads 
168 * run "at speed." On some systems, especially uniprocessors, 
169 * one thread may complete before the other has a chance to run, 
170 * and you won't see a deadlock or backoffs. In that case, try 
171 * running with the argument set to a positive number to cause 
172 * the threads to call sched_yield() at each lock; or, to make 
173 * it even more obvious, set to a negative number to cause the 
174 * threads to call sleep(l) instead. 
175 */ 
176 if (argc > 2) 
177 yield_flag = atoi (argv[2]); 
178 status = pthread_create ( 
179 sforward, NULL, lock_forward, NULL); 
180 if (status != 0) 
181 err_abort (status, "Create forward"); 
182 status = pthread_create ( 
183 sbackward, NULL, lock_backward, NULL); 
184 if (status != 0) 
185 err_abort (status, "Create backward"); 
186 pthread_exit (NULL); 
187 } 
| backoff.c 
Whatever type of hierarchy you choose, document it, carefully, completely, and 
often. Document it in each function that uses any of the mutexes. Document it 
where the mutexes are denned. Document it where they are declared in a project 
70 CHAPTER 3 Synchronization 
header file. Document it in the project design notes. Write it on your whiteboard. 
And then tie a string around your finger to be sure that you do not forget. 
You are free to unlock the mutexes in whatever order makes the most sense. 
Unlocking mutexes cannot result in deadlock. In the next section, I will talk 
about a sort of "overlapping hierarchy" of mutexes, called a "lock chain," where 
the normal mode of operation is to lock one mutex, lock the next, unlock the first, 
and so on. If you use a "try and back off algorithm, however, you should always 
try to release the mutexes in reverse order. That is, if you lock mutex 1, mutex 2, 
and then mutex 3, you should unlock mutex 3, then mutex 2, and finally mutex 1. 
If you unlock mutex 1 and mutex 2 while mutex 3 is still locked, another thread 
may have to lock both mutex 1 and mutex 2 before finding it cannot lock the 
entire hierarchy, at which point it will have to unlock mutex 2 and mutex 1, and 
then retry. Unlocking in reverse order reduces the chance that another thread will 
need to back off. 
3.2.5.2 Lock chaining 
"Chaining" is a special case of locking hierarchy, where the scope of two locks 
overlap. With one mutex locked, the code enters a region where another mutex is 
required. After successfully locking that second mutex, the first is no longer 
needed, and can be released. This technique can be very valuable in traversing 
data structures such as trees or linked lists. Instead of locking the entire data 
structure with a single mutex, and thereby preventing any parallel access, each 
node or link has a unique mutex. The traversal code would first lock the queue 
head, or tree root, find the desired node, lock it, and then release the root or 
queue head mutex. 
Because chaining is a special form of hierarchy, the two techniques are com- 
patible, if you apply them carefully. You might use hierarchical locking when 
balancing or pruning a tree, for example, and chaining when searching for a spe- 
cific node. 
Apply lock chaining with caution, however. It is exceptionally easy to write 
code that spends most of its time locking and unlocking mutexes that never 
exhibit any contention, and that is wasted processor time. Use lock chaining only 
when multiple threads will almost always be active within different parts of the 
hierarchy. 
3.3 Condition variables 
"There's no sort of use in knocking," said the Footman, "and that for two 
reasons. First, because I'm on the same side of the door as you are: 
secondly, because they're making such a noise inside, no one could 
possibly hear you." 
！Lewis Carroll, Alice's Adventures In Wonderland 
Condition variables 
71 
FIGURE 3.3 Condition variable analogy 
A condition variable is used for communicating information about the state of 
shared data. You would use a condition variable to signal that a queue was no 
longer empty, or that it had become empty, or that anything else needs to be done 
or can be done within the shared data manipulated by threads in your program. 
Our seafaring programmers use a mechanism much like condition variables to 
communicate (Figure 3.3). When the rower nudges a sleeping programmer to sig- 
nal that the sleeping programmer should wake up and start rowing, the original 
rower "signals a condition." When the exhausted ex-rower sinks into a deep slum- 
ber, secure that another programmer will wake him at the appropriate time, he is 
"waiting on a condition." When the horrified bailer discovers that water is seeping 
into the boat faster than he can remove it, and he yells for help, he is "broadcast- 
ing a condition." 
When a thread has mutually exclusive access to some shared state, it may 
find that there is no more it can do until some other thread changes the state. 
The state may be correct, and consistent！that is, no invariants are broken！but 
the current state just doesn't happen to be of interest to the thread. If a thread 
servicing a queue finds the queue empty, for example, the thread must wait until 
an entry is added to the queue. 
The shared data, for example, the queue, is protected by a mutex. A thread 
must lock the mutex to determine the current state of the queue, for example, to 
determine that it is empty. The thread must unlock the mutex before waiting (or 
72 CHAPTER 3 Synchronization 
no other thread would be able to insert an entry onto the queue), and then it 
must wait for the state to change. The thread might, for example, by some means 
block itself so that a thread inserting a new queue entry can find its identifier and 
awaken it. There is a problem here, though！the thread is running between 
unlocking and blocking. 
If the thread is still running while another thread locks the mutex and inserts 
an entry onto the queue, that other thread cannot determine that a thread is 
waiting for the new entry. The waiting thread has already looked at the queue and 
found it empty, and has unlocked the mutex, so it will now block itself without 
knowing that the queue is no longer empty. Worse, it may not yet have recorded 
the fact that it intends to wait, so it may wait forever because the other thread 
cannot find its identifier. The unlock and wait operations must be atomic, so that 
no other thread can lock the mutex before the waiter has become blocked, and is 
in a state where another thread can awaken it. 
I A condition variable wait always returns with the mutex locked. 
That's why condition variables exist. A condition variable is a "signaling mech- 
anism" associated with a mutex and by extension is also associated with the 
shared data protected by the mutex. Waiting on a condition variable atomically 
releases the associated mutex and waits until another thread signals (to wake 
one waiter) or broadcasts (to wake all waiters) the condition variable. The mutex 
must always be locked when you wait on a condition variable and, when a thread 
wakes up from a condition variable wait, it always resumes with the mutex 
locked. 
The shared data associated with a condition variable, for example, the queue 
"full" and "empty" conditions, are the predicates we talked about in Section 3.1. A 
condition variable is the mechanism your program uses to wait for a predicate to 
become true, and to communicate to other threads that it might be true. In other 
words, a condition variable allows threads using the queue to exchange informa- 
tion about the changes to the queue state. 
I Condition variables are for signaling, not for mutual exclusion. 
Condition variables do not provide mutual exclusion. You need a mutex to 
synchronize access to the shared data, including the predicate for which you 
wait. That is why you must specify a mutex when you wait on a condition vari- 
able. By making the unlock atomic with the wait, the Pthreads system ensures 
that no thread can change the predicate after you have unlocked the mutex but 
before your thread is waiting on the condition variable. 
Why isn't the mutex created as part of the condition variable? First, mutexes 
are used separately from any condition variable as often as they're used with con- 
dition variables. Second, it is common for one mutex to have more than one 
associated condition variable. For example, a queue may be "full" or "empty." 
Although you may have two condition variables to allow threads to wait for either 
Condition variables 
73 
condition, you must have one and only one mutex to synchronize all access to the 
queue header. 
A condition variable should be associated with a single predicate. If you try to 
share one condition variable between several predicates, or use several condition 
variables for a single predicate, you're risking deadlock or race problems. There's 
nothing wrong with doing either, as long as you're careful！but it is easy to con- 
fuse your program (computers aren't very smart) and it is usually not worth the 
risk. I will expound on the details later, but the rules are as follows: First, when 
you share a condition variable between multiple predicates, you must always 
broadcast, never signal; and second, signal is more efficient than broadcast. 
Both the condition variable and the predicate are shared data in your pro- 
gram; they are used by multiple threads, possibly at the same time. Because 
you're thinking of the condition variable and predicate as being locked together, it 
is easy to remember that they're always controlled using the same mutex. It is 
possible (and legal, and often even reasonable) to signal or broadcast a condition 
variable without having the mutex locked, but it is safer to have it locked. 
Figure 3.4 is a timing diagram showing how three threads, thread 1, thread 2, 
and thread 3, interact with a condition variable. The rounded box represents the 
condition variable, and the three lines represent the actions of the three threads. 
thread 1 
thread 2 
thread 3 
'Condition 
variable 
i i 
thread 1 signals 
with no waiters 
thread 1 waits 
thread 2 waits 
thread 3 signals, 
waking thread 1 
thread 3 waits 
thread 3's wait 
times out 
thread 3 waits with 
a timeout 
thread 1 broadcasts, 
waking thread 2 and 
thread 3 
FIGURE 3.4 Condition variable operation 
74 CHAPTER 3 Synchronization 
When a line goes within the box, it is "doing something" with the condition vari- 
able. When a thread's line stops before reaching below the middle line through 
the box, it is waiting on the condition variable; and when a thread's line reaches 
below the middle line, it is signaling or broadcasting to awaken waiters. 
Thread 1 signals the condition variable, which has no effect since there are no 
waiters. Thread 1 then waits on the condition variable. Thread 2 also blocks on 
the condition variable and, shortly thereafter, thread 3 signals the condition vari- 
able. Thread 3's signal unblocks thread 1. Thread 3 then waits on the condition 
variable. Thread 1 broadcasts the condition variable, unblocking both thread 2 
and thread 3. Thread 3 waits on the condition variable shortly thereafter, with a 
timed wait. Some time later, thread 3's wait times out, and the thread awakens. 
3.3.1 Creating and destroying a condition variable 
pthread_cond_t cond = PTHREAD_COND_INITIALIZER; 
int pthread_cond_init (pthread_cond_t *cond, 
pthread_condattr_t *condattr); 
int pthread_cond_destroy (pthread_cond_t *cond); 
A condition variable is represented in your program by a variable of type 
pthread_cond_t. You should never make a copy of a condition variable, because 
the result of using a copied condition variable is undefined. It would be like tele- 
phoning a disconnected number and expecting an answer. One thread could, for 
example, wait on one copy of the condition variable, while another thread sig- 
naled or broadcast the other copy of the condition variable！the waiting thread 
would not be awakened. You can, however, freely pass pointers to a condition 
variable so that various functions and threads can use it for synchronization. 
Most of the time you'll probably declare condition variables using the extern 
or static storage class at file scope, that is, outside of any function. They should 
have normal (extern) storage class if they are used by other files, or static stor- 
age class if used only within the file that declares the variable. When you declare 
a static condition variable that has default attributes, you should use the 
pthread_cond_initializer initialization macro, as shown in the following exam- 
ple, cond_static.c. 
| cond_static.c 
1 #include <pthread.h> 
2 #include "errors.h" 
3 
4 /* 
5 * Declare a structure, with a mutex and condition variable, 
6 * statically initialized. This is the same as using 
Condition variables 75 
7 * pthread_mutex_init and pthread_cond_init, with the default 
8 * attributes. 
9 */ 
10 typedef struct my_struct_tag { 
11 pthread_mutex_t mutex; /* Protects access to value */ 
12 pthread_cond_t cond; /* Signals change to value */ 
13 int value; /* Access protected by mutex */ 
14 } my_struct_t; 
15 
16 my_struct_t data = { 
17 PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER, PTHREAD_COND_INITIALIZER, 0}; 
18 
19 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
20 { 
21 return 0; 
22 } 
| cond_static.c 
I Condition variables and their predicates are "linked"！for best results, 
treat them that way! 
When you declare a condition variable, remember that a condition variable 
and the associated predicate are "locked together." You may save yourself (or your 
successor) some confusion by always declaring the condition variable and predi- 
cate together, if possible. I recommend that you try to encapsulate a set of 
invariants and predicates with its mutex and one or more condition variables as 
members in a structure, and carefully document the association. 
Sometimes you cannot initialize a condition variable statically; for example, 
when you use malloc to create a structure that contains a condition variable. 
Then you will need to call pthread_cond_init to initialize the condition variable 
dynamically, as shown in the following example, cond_dynamic.c. You can also 
dynamically initialize condition variables that you declare statically！but you 
must ensure that each condition variable is initialized before it is used, and that 
each is initialized only once. You may initialize it before creating any threads, for 
example, or by using pthread_once (Section 5.1). If you need to initialize a condi- 
tion variable with nondefault attributes, you must use dynamic initialization (see 
Section 5.2.2). 
| cond_dynamic.c 
1 iinclude <pthread.h> 
2 #include "errors.h" 
3 
4 /* 
5 * Define a structure, with a mutex and condition variable. 
6 */ 
7 typedef struct my_struct_tag { 
76 CHAPTER 3 Synchronization 
8 pthread_mutex_t mutex; /* Protects access to value */ 
9 pthread_cond_t cond; /* Signals change to value */ 
10 int value; /* Access protected by mutex */ 
11 } my_struct_t; 
12 
13 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
14 { 
15 my_struct_t *data; 
16 int status; 
17 
18 data = malloc (sizeof (my_struct_t)); 
19 if (data == NULL) 
20 errno_abort ("Allocate structure"); 
21 status = pthread_mutex_init (&data->mutex, NULL); 
22 if (status != 0) 
23 err_abort (status, "Init mutex"); 
24 status = pthread_cond_init (&data->cond, NULL); 
25 if (status != 0) 
26 err_abort (status, "Init condition"); 
27 status = pthread_cond_destroy (&data->cond); 
28 if (status != 0) 
29 err_abort (status, "Destroy condition"); 
30 status = pthread_mutex_destroy (&data->mutex); 
31 if (status != 0) 
32 err_abort (status, "Destroy mutex"); 
33 (void)free (data); 
34 return status; 
35 } 
| cond_dynamic.c 
When you dynamically initialize a condition variable, you should destroy the 
condition variable when you no longer need it, by calling pthread_cond_destroy. 
You do not need to destroy a condition variable that was statically initialized 
using the pthread_cond_initializer macro. 
It is safe to destroy a condition variable when you know that no threads can 
be blocked on the condition variable, and no additional threads will try to wait on, 
signal, or broadcast the condition variable. The best way to determine this is usu- 
ally within a thread that has just successfully broadcast to unblock all waiters, 
when program logic ensures that no threads will try to use the condition variable 
later. 
When a thread removes a structure containing a condition variable from a list, 
for example, and then broadcasts to awaken any waiters, it is safe (and also a 
very good idea) to destroy the condition variable before freeing the storage that 
the condition variable occupies. The awakened threads should check their wait 
predicate when they resume, so you must make sure that you don't free 
resources required for the predicate before they've done so！this may require 
additional synchronization. 
Condition variables 77 
3.3.2 Waiting on a condition variable 
int pthread_cond_wait (pthread_cond_t *cond, 
pthread_mutex_t *mutex); 
int pthread_cond_timedwait (pthread_cond_t *cond, 
pthread_mutex_t *mutex, 
struct timespec *expiration); 
Each condition variable must be associated with a specific mutex, and with a 
predicate condition. When a thread waits on a condition variable it must always 
have the associated mutex locked. Remember that the condition variable wait 
operation will unlock the mutex for you before blocking the thread, and it will 
relock the mutex before returning to your code. 
All threads that wait on any one condition variable concurrently (at the same 
time) must specify the same associated mutex. Pthreads does not allow thread 1, 
for example, to wait on condition variable A specifying mutex A while thread 2 
waits on condition variable A specifying mutex B. It is, however, perfectly reason- 
able for thread 1 to wait on condition variable A specifying mutex A while thread 2 
waits on condition variable B specifying mutex A. That is, each condition variable 
must be associated, at any given time, with only one mutex！but a mutex may 
have any number of condition variables associated with it. 
It is important that you test the predicate after locking the appropriate mutex 
and before waiting on the condition variable. If a thread signals or broadcasts a 
condition variable while no threads are waiting, nothing happens. If some other 
thread calls pthread_cond_wait right after that, it will keep waiting regardless of 
the fact that the condition variable was just signaled, which means that if a 
thread waits when it doesn't have to, it may never wake up. Because the mutex 
remains locked until the thread is blocked on the condition variable, the predi- 
cate cannot become set between the predicate test and the wait！the mutex is 
locked and no other thread can change the shared data, including the predicate. 
I Always test your predicate; and then test it again! 
It is equally important that you test the predicate again when the thread 
wakes up. You should always wait for a condition variable in a loop, to protect 
against program errors, multiprocessor races, and spurious wakeups. The follow- 
ing short program, cond.c, shows how to wait on a condition variable. Proper 
predicate loops are also shown in all of the examples in this book that use condi- 
tion variables, for example, alarm_cond.c in Section 3.3.4. 
20-37 The wait_thread sleeps for a short time to allow the main thread to reach its 
condition wait before waking it, sets the shared predicate (data, value), and then 
signals the condition variable. The amount of time for which wait_thread will 
sleep is controlled by the hibernation variable, which defaults to one second. 
78 CHAPTER 3 Synchronization 
51-52 If the program was run with an argument, interpret the argument as an inte- 
ger value, which is stored in hibernation. This controls the amount of time for 
which wait-thread will sleep before signaling the condition variable. 
68-83 The main thread calls pthread_cond_timedwait to wait for up to two seconds 
(from the current time). If hibernation has been set to a value of greater than two 
seconds, the condition wait will time out, returning ETIMEDOUT. If hibernation 
has been set to two, the main thread and wait_thread race, and, in principle, the 
result could differ each time you run the program. If hibernation is set to a value 
less than two, the condition wait should not time out. 
| cond.c 
1 #include <pthread.h> 
2 #include <time.h> 
3 #include "errors.h" 
4 
5 typedef struct my_struct_tag { 
6 pthread_mutex_t mutex; /* Protects access to value */ 
7 pthread_cond_t cond; /* Signals change to value */ 
8 int value; /* Access protected by mutex */ 
9 } my_struct_t; 
10 
11 my_struct_t data = { 
12 PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER, PTHREAD_COND_INITIALIZER, 0}; 
13 
14 int hibernation =1; /* Default to 1 second */ 
15 
16 /* 
17 * Thread start routine. It will set the main thread's predicate 
18 * and signal the condition variable. 
19 */ 
20 void * 
21 wait_thread (void *arg) 
22 { 
23 int status; 
24 
25 sleep (hibernation); 
26 status = pthread_mutex_lock (Sdata.mutex); 
27 if (status != 0) 
28 err_abort (status, "Lock mutex"); 
29 data.value =1; /* Set predicate */ 
30 status = pthread_cond_signal (Sdata.cond); 
31 if (status != 0) 
32 err_abort (status, "Signal condition"); 
33 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (sdata.mutex); 
34 if (status != 0) 
35 err_abort (status, "Unlock mutex"); 
36 return NULL; 
37 } 
Condition variables 79 
38 
39 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
40 { 
41 int status; 
42 pthread_t wait_thread_id; 
43 struct timespec timeout; 
44 
45 /* 
46 * If an argument is specified, interpret it as the number 
47 * of seconds for wait_thread to sleep before signaling the 
48 * condition variable. You can play with this to see the 
49 * condition wait below time out or wake normally. 
50 */ 
51 if (argc > 1) 
52 hibernation = atoi (argv[l]); 
53 
54 /* 
55 * Create wait_thread. 
56 */ 
57 status = pthread_create ( 
58 &wait_thread_id, NULL, wait_thread, NULL); 
59 if (status != 0) 
60 err_abort (status, "Create wait thread"); 
61 
62 /* 
63 * Wait on the condition variable for 2 seconds, or until 
64 * signaled by the wait_thread. Normally, wait_thread 
65 * should signal. If you raise "hibernation" above 2 
66 * seconds, it will time out. 
67 */ 
68 timeout.tv_sec = time (NULL) + 2; 
69 timeout.tv_nsec = 0; 
70 status = pthread_mutex_lock (Sdata.mutex); 
71 if (status != 0) 
72 err_abort (status, "Lock mutex"); 
73 
74 while (data, value == 0) { , ' ''|<.|< 
75 status = pthread_cond_timedwait ( 
76 Sdata.cond, Sdata.mutex, stimeout); 
77 if (status == ETIMEDOUT) { 
78 printf ("Condition wait timed out.\n"); 
79 break; 
80 } 
81 else if (status != 0) 
82 err_abort (status, "Wait on condition"); 
83 } 
84 
85 if (data.value != 0) 
86 printf ("Condition was signaled.\n"); 
80 CHAPTER 3 Synchronization 
87 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (sdata.mutex); 
88 if (status != 0) 
89 err_abort (status, "Unlock mutex"); 
90 return 0; 
91 } 
| cond.c 
There are a lot of reasons why it is a good idea to write code that does not 
assume the predicate is always true on wakeup, but here are a few of the main 
reasons: 
Intercepted wakeups: Remember that threads are asynchronous. Waking up 
from a condition variable wait involves locking the associated mutex. But 
what if some other thread acquires the mutex first? It may, for example, be 
checking the predicate before waiting itself. It doesn't have to wait, since 
the predicate is now true. If the predicate is "work available," it will accept 
the work. When it unlocks the mutex there may be no more work. It would 
be expensive, and usually counterproductive, to ensure that the latest 
awakened thread got the work. 
Loose predicates: For a lot of reasons it is often easy and convenient to use 
approximations of actual state. For example, "there may be work" instead 
of "there is work." It is often much easier to signal or broadcast based on 
"loose predicates" than on the real "tight predicates." If you always test the 
tight predicates before and after waiting on a condition variable, you're free 
to signal based on the loose approximations when that makes sense. And 
your code will be much more robust when a condition variable is signaled 
or broadcast accidentally. Use of loose predicates or accidental wakeups 
may turn out to be a performance issue; but in many cases it won't make a 
difference. 
Spurious wakeups: This means that when you wait on a condition variable, 
the wait may (occasionally) return when no thread specifically broadcast or 
signaled that condition variable. Spurious wakeups may sound strange, 
but on some multiprocessor systems, making condition wakeup completely 
predictable might substantially slow all condition variable operations. The 
race conditions that cause spurious wakeups should be considered rare. 
It usually takes only a few instructions to retest your predicate, and it is a 
good programming discipline. Continuing without retesting the predicate could 
lead to serious application errors that might be difficult to track down later. So 
don't make assumptions: Always wait for a condition variable in a while loop 
testing the predicate. 
You can also use the pthread_cond_timedwait function, which causes the 
wait to end with an etimedout status after a certain time is reached. The time is 
an absolute clock time, using the POSIX. lb struct timespec format. The time- 
out is absolute rather than an interval (or "delta time") so that once you've 
computed the timeout it remains valid regardless of spurious or intercepted 
Condition variables 81 
wakeups. Although it might seem easier to use an interval time, you'd have to 
recompute it every time the thread wakes up, before waiting again！which would 
require determining how long it had already waited. 
When a timed condition wait returns with the etimedout error, you should 
test your predicate before treating the return as an error. If the condition for 
which you were waiting is true, the fact that it may have taken too long usually 
isn't important. Remember that a thread always relocks the mutex before return- 
ing from a condition wait, even when the wait times out. Waiting for a locked 
mutex after timeout can cause the timed wait to appear to have taken a lot longer 
than the time you requested. 
3.3.3 Waking condition variable waiters 
int pthread_cond_signal (pthread_cond_t *cond); 
int pthread_cond_broadcast (pthread_cond_t *cond); 
Once you've got a thread waiting on a condition variable for some predicate, 
you'll probably want to wake it up. Pthreads provides two ways to wake a condi- 
tion variable waiter. One is called "signal" and the other is called "broadcast." A 
signal operation wakes up a single thread waiting on the condition variable, while 
broadcast wakes up all threads waiting on the condition variable. 
The term "signal" is easily confused with the "POSIX signal" mechanisms that 
allow you to define "signal actions," manipulate "signal masks," and so forth. 
However, the term "signal," as we use it here, had independently become well 
established in threading literature, and even in commercial implementations, 
and the Pthreads working group decided not to change the term. Luckily, there 
are few situations where we might be tempted to use both terms together！it is a 
very good idea to avoid using signals in threaded programs when at all possible. If 
we are careful to say "signal a condition variable" or "POSIX signal" (or "UNIX sig- 
nal") where there is any ambiguity, we are unlikely to cause anyone severe 
discomfort. 
It is easy to think of "broadcast" as a generalization of "signal," but it is more 
accurate to think of signal as an optimization of broadcast. Remember that it is 
never wrong to use broadcast instead of signal since waiters have to account for 
intercepted and spurious wakes. The only difference, in fact, is efficiency: A 
broadcast will wake additional threads that will have to test their predicate and 
resume waiting. But, in general, you can't replace a broadcast with a signal. 
"When in doubt, broadcast." 
Use signal when only one thread needs to wake up to process the changed 
state, and when any waiting thread can do so. If you use one condition variable 
for several program predicate conditions, you can't use the signal operation; you 
couldn't tell whether it would awaken a thread waiting for that predicate, or for 
82 CHAPTER 3 Synchronization 
another predicate. Don't try to get around that by resignaling the condition vari- 
able when you find the predicate isn't true. That might not pass on the signal as 
you expect; a spurious or intercepted wakeup could result in a series of pointless 
resignals. 
If you add a single item to a queue, and only threads waiting for an item to 
appear are blocked on the condition variable, then you should probably use a sig- 
nal. That'll wake up a single thread to check the queue and let the others sleep 
undisturbed, avoiding unnecessary context switches. On the other hand, if you 
add more than one item to the queue, you will probably need to broadcast. For 
examples of both broadcast and signal operations on condition variables, check 
out the "read/write lock" package in Section 7.1.2. 
Although you must have the associated mutex locked to wait on a condition 
variable, you can signal (or broadcast) a condition variable with the associated 
mutex unlocked if that is more convenient. The advantage of doing so is that, on 
many systems, this may be more efficient. When a waiting thread awakens, it 
must first lock the mutex. If the thread awakens while the signaling thread holds 
the mutex, then the awakened thread must immediately block on the mutex！ 
you've gone through two context switches to get back where you started.* 
Weighing on the other side is the fact that, if the mutex is not locked, any 
thread (not only the one being awakened) can lock the mutex prior to the thread 
being awakened. This race is one source of intercepted wakeups. A lower-priority 
thread, for example, might lock the mutex while another thread was about to 
awaken a very high-priority thread, delaying scheduling of the high-priority 
thread. If the mutex remains locked while signaling, this cannot happen！the 
high-priority waiter will be placed before the lower-priority waiter on the mutex, 
and will be scheduled first. 
3.3.4 One final alarm program 
It is time for one final version of our simple alarm program. In alarm_ 
mutex.c, we reduced resource utilization by eliminating the use of a separate 
execution context (thread or process) for each alarm. Instead of separate execu- 
tion contexts, we used a single thread that processed a list of alarms. There was 
one problem, however, with that approach！it was not responsive to new alarm 
commands. It had to finish waiting for one alarm before it could detect that 
another had been entered onto the list with an earlier expiration time, for exam- 
ple, if one entered the commands 0 message 1" followed by  message 2." 
* There is an optimization, which I've called "wait morphing," that moves a thread directly 
from the condition variable wait queue to the mutex wait queue in this case, without a context 
switch, when the mutex is locked. This optimization can produce a substantial performance ben- 
efit for many applications. 
Condition variables 83 
Now that we have added condition variables to our arsenal of threaded pro- 
gramming tools, we will solve that problem. The new version, creatively named 
alarm_cond. c, uses a timed condition wait rather than sleep to wait for an alarm 
expiration time. When main inserts a new entry at the head of the list, it signals 
the condition variable to awaken alarm_thread immediately. The alarm_thread 
then requeues the alarm on which it was waiting, to sort it properly with respect 
to the new entry, and tries again. 
20,22 Part 1 shows the declarations for alarm_cond.c. There are two additions to 
this section, compared to alarm_mutex.c: a condition variable called alarm_cond 
and the current_alarm variable, which allows main to determine the expiration 
time of the alarm on which alarm_thread is currently waiting. The current_alarm 
variable is an optimization！main does not need to awaken alarm_thread unless 
it is either idle, or waiting for an alarm later than the one main has just inserted. 
| alarm_cond.c part 1 declarations 
1 #include <pthread.h> 
2 #include <time.h> 
3 #include "errors.h" 
4 
5 /* 
6 * The "alarm" structure now contains the time_t (time since the 
7 * Epoch, in seconds) for each alarm, so that they can be 
8 * sorted. Storing the requested number of seconds would not be 
9 * enough, since the "alarm thread" cannot tell how long it has 
10 * been on the list. 
U */ 
12 typedef struct alarm_tag { 
13 struct alarm_tag *link; 
14 int seconds; 
15 time_t time; /* seconds from EPOCH */ 
16 char message[64]; 
17 } alarm_t; 
18 
19 pthread_mutex_t alarmjnutex = PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER; 
20 pthread_cond_t alarm_cond = PTHREAD_COND_INITIALIZER; 
21 alarm_t *alarm_list = NULL; 
22 time_t current_alarm = 0; 
| alarm_cond.c part 1 declarations 
Part 2 shows the new function alarm_insert. This function is nearly the same 
as the list insertion code from alarm_mutex.c, except that it signals the condition 
variable alarm_cond when necessary. I made alarm_insert a separate function 
because now it needs to be called from two places！once by main to insert a new 
alarm, and now also by alarm_thread to reinsert an alarm that has been "pre- 
empted" by a new earlier alarm. 
84 
CHAPTER 3 Synchronization 
9-14 I have recommended that mutex locking protocols be documented, and here is 
an example: The alarm_insert function points out explicitly that it must be 
called with the alarm_mutex locked. 
48-53 If current_alarm (the time of the next alarm expiration) is 0, then the alarm_ 
thread is not aware of any outstanding alarm requests, and is waiting for new 
work. If current_alarm has a time greater than the expiration time of the new 
alarm, then alarm_thread is not planning to look for new work soon enough to 
handle the new alarm. In either case, signal the alarm_cond condition variable so 
that alarm_thread will wake up and process the new alarm. 
alarm cond.c 
part 2 alarm_insert 
1 /* 
2 * Insert alarm entry on list, in order. 
3 */ 
4 void alarm_insert (alarm_t *alarm) 
5 { 
6 int status; 
7 alarm t **last, *next; 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
/* 
* 
* 
LOCKING PROTOCOL: 
* This routine requires that the caller have locked the 
* alarm_mutex! 
*/ 
last = &alarm_list; 
next = *last; 
while (next != NULL) { 
if (next->time >= alarm->time) { 
alarm->link = next; 
*last = alarm; 
break; 
} 
last = &next->link; 
next = next->link; 
/* 
* If we reached the end of the list, insert the new alarm 
* there. ("next" is NULL, and "last" points to the link 
* field of the last item, or to the list header.) 
*/ 
if (next == NULL) { 
*last = alarm; 
alarm->link = NULL; 
#ifdef DEBUG 
printf ("[list: 
"); 
Condition variables 85 
37 for (next = alarm_list; next != NULL; next = next->link) 
38 printf ("%d(%d)[\"%s\"] ", next->time, 
39 next->time - time (NULL), next->message); 
40 printf ("]\n"); 
41 #endif 
42 /* 
43 * Wake the alarm thread if it is not busy (that is, if 
44 * current_alarm is 0, signifying that it's waiting for 
45 * work), or if the new alarm comes before the one on 
46 * which the alarm thread is waiting. 
47 */ 
48 if (current_alarm == 0 || alarm->time < current_alarm) { 
49 current_alarm = alarm->time; 
50 status = pthread_cond_signal (&alarm_cond); 
51 if (status != 0) 
52 err_abort (status, "Signal cond"); 
53 } 
54 } 
| alarm_cond.c part 2 alarm_insert 
Part 3 shows the alarm_thread function, the start function for the "alarm 
server" thread. The general structure of alarm_thread is very much like the 
alarm_thread in alarmjnutex.c. The differences are due to the addition of the 
condition variable. 
26-31 If the alarm_list is empty, alarm_mutex.c could do nothing but sleep any- 
way, so that main would be able to process a new command. The result was that 
it could not see a new alarm request for at least a full second. Now, alarm_thread 
instead waits on the alarm_cond condition variable, with no timeout. It will 
"sleep" until you enter a new alarm command, and then main will be able to 
awaken it immediately. Setting current_alarm to 0 tells main that alarin_thread 
is idle. Remember that pthread_cond_wait unlocks the mutex before waiting, 
and relocks the mutex before returning to the caller. 
35 The new variable expired is initialized to 0; it will be set to 1 later if the timed 
condition wait expires. This makes it a little easier to decide whether to print the 
current alarm's message at the bottom of the loop. 
36-42 If the alarm we've just removed from the list hasn't already expired, then we 
need to wait for it. Because we're using a timed condition wait, which requires a 
POSIX. lb struct timespec, rather than the simple integer time required by 
sleep, we convert the expiration time. This is easy, because a struct timespec 
has two members！tv_sec is the number of seconds since the Epoch, which is 
exactly what we already have from the time function, and tv_nsec is an addi- 
tional count of nanoseconds. We will just set tv_nsec to 0, since we have no need 
of the greater resolution. 
43 Record the expiration time in the current_alarm variable so that main can 
determine whether to signal alarm_cond when a new alarm is added. 
86 CHAPTER 3 Synchronization 
44-53 Wait until either the current alarm has expired, or main requests that alarm_ 
thread look for a new, earlier alarm. Notice that the predicate test is split here, 
for convenience. The expression in the while statement is only half the predicate, 
detecting that main has changed current_alarm by inserting an earlier timer. 
When the timed wait returns etimedout, indicating that the current alarm has 
expired, we exit the while loop with a break statement at line 49. 
54-55 If the while loop exited when the current alarm had not expired, main must 
have asked alarm_thread to process an earlier alarm. Make sure the current 
alarm isn't lost by reinserting it onto the list. 
57 If we remove from alarm_list an alarm that has already expired, just set the 
expired variable to 1 to ensure that the message is printed. 
| alarm_cond.c part 3 alarm_routine 
1 /* 
2 * The alarm thread's start routine. 
3 */ 
4 void *alarm_thread (void *arg) 
5 { 
6 alarm_t *alarm; 
7 struct timespec cond_time; 
8 time_t now; 
9 int status, expired; 
10 
n /* 
12 * Loop forever, processing commands. The alarm thread will 
13 * be disintegrated when the process exits. Lock the mutex 
14 * at the start -- it will be unlocked during condition 
15 * waits, so the main thread can insert alarms. 
16 */ 
17 status = pthread_mutex_lock (&alarm_mutex); 
18 if (status != 0) 
19 err_abort (status, "Lock mutex"); 
20 while A) { 
21 /* 
22 * If the alarm list is empty, wait until an alarm is 
23 * added. Setting current_alarm to 0 informs the insert 
24 * routine that the thread is not busy. 
25 */ 
26 current_alarm = 0; 
27 while (alarm_list == NULL) { 
28 status = pthread_cond_wait (&alarm_cond, &alarm_mutex); 
29 if (status != 0) 
30 err_abort (status, "Wait on cond"); 
31 } 
32 alarm = alarm_list; 
33 alarm_list = alarm->link; 
34 now = time (NULL); 
Condition variables 
87 
35 
36 
37 
38 
39 
40 
|U 
42 
43 
44 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
51 
52 
53 
54 
55 
56 
57 
58 
59 
60 
61 
62 
63 
expired = 0; 
if (alarm->time > now) { 
#ifdef DEBUG 
printf ("[waiting: %d(%d)\"%s\"]\n", alarm->time, 
alarm->time - time (NULL), alarm->message); 
#endif 
cond_time.tv_sec = alarm->time; 
cond_time.tv_nsec =0; 
current_alarm = alarm->time; 
while (current_alarm == alarm->time) { 
status = pthread_cond_timedwait ( 
&alarm_cond, &alarm_mutex, &cond_time); 
if (status == ETIMEDOUT) { 
expired = 1; 
} 
if 
break; 
(status != 0) 
err abort (status, "Cond timedwait"); 
} 
if 
(!expired) 
alarm_insert (alarm); 
} else 
expired = 1; 
if (expired) { 
printf ("(%d) %s\n" 
free (alarm); 
alarm->seconds, alarm->message); 
alarm cond.c 
part 3 alarm_routine 
Part 4 shows the final section of alarm_cond.c, the main program. It is nearly 
identical to the main function from alarm_mutex.c. 
38 Because the condition variable signal operation is built into the new alarm_ 
insert function, we call alarm_insert rather than inserting a new alarm 
directly. 
alarm cond.c 
part 4 main 
int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
{ 
int status; 
char line[128]; 
alarm_t *alarm; 
pthread_t thread; 
status = pthread_create ( 
{.thread, NULL, alarm thread, NULL); 
88 CHAPTER 3 Synchronization 
10 if (status != 0) 
11 err_abort (status, "Create alarm thread"); 
12 while A) { 
13 printf ("Alarm> "); 
14 if (fgets (line, sizeof (line), stdin) == NULL) exit @); 
15 if (strlen (line) <= 1) continue; 
16 alarm = (alarm_t*)malloc (sizeof (alarm_t)); 
17 if (alarm == NULL) 
18 errno_abort ("Allocate alarm"); 
19 
20 /* 
21 * Parse input line into seconds (%d) and a message 
22 * (%64[A\n]), consisting of up to 64 characters 
23 * separated from the seconds by whitespace. 
24 */ 
25 if (sscanf (line, "%d %64["\n]", 
26 &alarm->seconds, alarm->message) < 2) { 
27 fprintf (stderr, "Bad commandSn"); 
28 free (alarm); 
29 } else { 
30 status = pthread_mutex_lock (&alarm_mutex); 
31 if (status != 0) 
32 err_abort (status, "Lock mutex"); 
33 alarm->time = time (NULL) + alarm->seconds; 
34 /* 
35 * Insert the new alarm into the list of alarms, 
36 * sorted by expiration time. 
37 */ 
38 alarm_insert (alarm); 
39 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (&alarm_mutex); 
40 if (status != 0) 
41 err_abort (status, "Unlock mutex"); 
42 } 
43 } 
44 } 
| alarm_cond. c part 4 main 
3.4 Memory visibility between threads 
The moment Alice appeared, she was appealed to by all three to settle the 
question, and they repeated their arguments to her, though, as they all 
spoke at once, she found it very hard to make out exactly what they 
said. 
！Lewis Carroll, Alice's Adventures in Wonderland 
Memory visibility between threads 89 
In this chapter we have seen how you should use mutexes and condition vari- 
ables to synchronize (or "coordinate") thread activities. Now we'll journey off on a 
tangent, for just a few pages, and see what is really meant by "synchronization" in 
the world of threads. It is more than making sure two threads don't write to the 
same location at the same time, although that's part of it. As the title of this sec- 
tion implies, it is about how threads see the computer's memory. 
Pthreads provides a few basic rules about memory visibility. You can count on 
all implementations of the standard to follow these rules: 
1. Whatever memory values a thread can see when it calls pthread_create 
can also be seen by the new thread when it starts. Any data written to 
memory after the call to pthread_create may not necessarily be seen by 
the new thread, even if the write occurs before the thread starts. 
2. Whatever memory values a thread can see when it unlocks a mutex, either 
directly or by waiting on a condition variable, can also be seen by any 
thread that later locks the same mutex. Again, data written after the mutex 
is unlocked may not necessarily be seen by the thread that locks the 
mutex, even if the write occurs before the lock. 
3. Whatever memory values a thread can see when it terminates, either by 
cancellation, returning from its start function, or by calling pthread_exit, 
can also be seen by the thread that joins with the terminated thread by 
calling pthread_join. And, of course, data written after the thread termi- 
nates may not necessarily be seen by the thread that joins, even if the write 
occurs before the join. 
4. Whatever memory values a thread can see when it signals or broadcasts a 
condition variable can also be seen by any thread that is awakened by that 
signal or broadcast. And, one more time, data written after the signal or 
broadcast may not necessarily be seen by the thread that wakes up, even if 
the write occurs before it awakens. 
Figures 3.5 and 3.6 demonstrate some of the consequences. So what should 
you, as a programmer, do? 
First, where possible make sure that only one thread will ever access a piece of 
data. A thread's registers can't be modified by another thread. A thread's stack 
and heap memory a thread allocates is private unless the thread communicates 
pointers to that memory to other threads. Any data you put in register or auto 
variables can therefore be read at a later time with no more complication than in 
a completely synchronous program. Each thread is synchronous with itself. The 
less data you share between threads, the less work you have to do. 
Second, any time two threads need to access the same data, you have to apply 
one of the Pthreads memory visibility rules, which, in most cases, means using a 
mutex. This is not only to protect against multiple writes！even when a thread 
only reads data it must use a mutex to ensure that it sees the most recent value 
of the data written while the mutex was locked. 
90 
CHAPTER 3 Synchronization 
This example does everything correctly. The left-hand code (running in thread A) 
sets the value of several variables while it has a mutex locked. The right-hand 
code (running in thread B) reads those values, also while holding the mutex. 
Thread A Thread B 
pthread mutex 
variableA = 1 
variableB = 2 
pthread mutex 
lock (Smutexl); 
r 
t 
unlock (Smutexl); 
pthread 
localA = 
mutex lock (Smutexl); 
= variableA; 
localB = variableB; 
pthread_mutex unlock (smutexl); 
Rule 2: visibility from pthread_mutex_unlock to pthread_mutex_lock. When 
thread B returns from pthread_mutex_lock, it will see the same values for 
variableA and variableB that thread A had seen at the time it called pthread_ 
mutex_unlock. That is, 1 and 2, respectively. 
FIGURE 3.5 Correct memory visibility 
This example shows an error. The left-hand code (running in thread A) sets the 
value of variables after unlocking the mutex. The right-hand code (running in 
thread B) reads those values while holding the mutex. 
Thread A Thread B 
pthread_mutex_lock (Smutexl); 
variableA = 1; 
pthread_mutex_unlock (Smutexl); 
variableB = 2; 
pthread_mutex_lock (Smutexl); 
localA = variableA; 
localB = variableB; 
pthread mutex unlock (Smutexl); 
Rule 2: visibility from pthread_mutex_unlock to pthread_mutex_lock. When 
thread B returns from pthread_mutex_lock, it will see the same values for 
variableA and variableB that thread A had seen at the time it called pthread_ 
mutex_unlock. That is, it will see the value 1 for variableA, but may not see 
the value 2 for variableB since that was written after the mutex was unlocked. 
FIGURE 3.6 Incorrect memory visibility 
As the rules state, there are specific cases where you do not need to use a 
mutex to ensure visibility. If one thread sets a global variable, and then creates a 
new thread that reads the same variable, you know that the new thread will not 
see an old value. But if you create a thread and then set some variable that the 
new thread reads, the thread may not see the new value, even if the creating 
thread succeeds in writing the new value before the new thread reads it. 
Memory visibility between threads 91 
I Warning! We are now descending below the Pthreads API into details 
of hardware memory architecture that you may prefer not to know. You 
may want to skip this explanation for now and come back later. 
If you are willing to just trust me on all that (or if you've had enough for now), 
you may now skip past the end of this section. This book is not about multipro- 
cessor memory architecture, so I will just skim the surface！but even so, the 
details are a little deep, and if you don't care right now, you do not need to worry 
about them yet. You will probably want to come back later and read the rest, 
though, when you have some time. 
In a single-threaded, fully synchronous program, it is "safe" to read or write 
any memory at any time. That is, if the program writes a value to some memory 
address, and later reads from that memory address, it will always receive the last 
value that it wrote to that address. 
When you add asynchronous behavior (which includes multiprocessors) to the 
program, the assumptions about memory visibility become more complicated. 
For example, an asynchronous signal could occur at any point in the program's 
execution. If the program writes a value to memory, a signal handler runs and 
writes a different value to the same memory address, when the main program 
resumes and reads the value, it may not receive the value it wrote. 
That's not usually a major problem, because you go to a lot of trouble to 
declare and use signal handlers. They run "specialized" code in a distinctly differ- 
ent environment from the main program. Experienced programmers know that 
they should write global data only with extreme care, and it is possible to keep 
track of what they do. If that becomes awkward, you block the signal around 
areas of code that use the global data. 
When you add multiple threads to the program the asynchronous code is no 
longer special. Each thread runs normal program code, and all in the same unre- 
stricted environment. You can hardly ever be sure you always know what each 
thread may be doing. It is likely that they will all read and write some of the same 
data. Your threads may run at unpredictable times or even simultaneously on 
different processors. And that's when things get interesting. 
By the way, although we are talking about programming with multiple 
threads, none of the problems outlined in this section is specific to threads. 
Rather, they are artifacts of memory architecture design, and they apply to any 
situation where two "things" independently access the same memory. The two 
things may be threads running on separate processors, but they could instead be 
processes running on separate processors and using shared memory. Or one 
"thing" might be code running on a uniprocessor, while an independent I/O con- 
troller reads or writes the same memory. 
I A memory address can hold only one value at a time; don't let threads 
"race" to get there first. 
When two threads write different values to the same memory address, one 
after the other, the final state of memory is the same as if a single thread had 
92 CHAPTER 3 Synchronization 
written those two values in the same sequence. Either way only one value 
remains in memory. The problem is that it becomes difficult to know which write 
occurred last. Measuring some absolute external time base, it may be obvious 
that "processor B" wrote the value " several microseconds after "processor A" 
wrote the value ." That doesn't mean the final state of memory will have a ." 
Why? Because we haven't said anything about how the machine's cache and 
memory bus work. The processors probably have cache memory, which is just 
fast, local memory used to keep quickly accessible copies of data that were 
recently read from main memory. In a write-back cache system, data is initially 
written only to cache, and copied ("flushed") to main memory at some later time. 
In a machine that doesn't guarantee read/write ordering, each cache block may 
be written whenever the processor finds it convenient. If two processors write dif- 
ferent values to the same memory address, each processor's value will go into its 
own cache. Eventually both values will be written to main memory, but at essen- 
tially random times, not directly related to the order in which the values were 
written to the respective processor caches. 
Even two writes from within a single thread (processor) need not appear in 
memory in the same order. The memory controller may find it faster, or just more 
convenient, to write the values in "reverse" order, as shown in Figure 3.7. They 
may have been cached in different cache blocks, for example, or interleaved to 
different memory banks. In general, there's no way to make a program aware of 
these effects. If there was, a program that relied on them might not run correctly 
on a different model of the same processor family, much less on a different type of 
computer. 
The problems aren't restricted to two threads writing memory. Imagine that 
one thread writes a value to a memory address on one processor, and then 
another thread reads from that memory address on another processor. It may 
seem obvious that the thread will see the last value written to that address, and on 
some hardware that will be true. This is sometimes called "memory coherence" or 
"read/write ordering." But it is complicated to ensure that sort of synchronization 
between processors. It slows the memory system and the overhead provides no 
benefit to most code. Many modern computers (usually among the fastest) don't 
guarantee any ordering of memory accesses between different processors, unless 
the program uses special instructions commonly known as memory barriers. 
Time 
t 
t+1 
t+2 
t+3 
t+4 
Thread 1 
write " to address 1 
write " to address 2 
cache system flushes 
cache system flushes 
(cache) 
(cache) 
address 
address 
2 
1 
Thread : 
read 
read 
" 
" 
2 
from 
from 
address 
address 
1 
2 
FIGURE 3.7 Memory ordering without synchronization 
Memory visibility between threads 
93 
Memory accesses in these computers are, at least in principle, queued to the 
memory controller, and may be processed in whatever order becomes most effi- 
cient. A read from an address that is not in the processor's cache may be held 
waiting for the cache fill, while later reads complete. A write to a "dirty" cache 
line, which requires that old data be flushed, may be held while later writes com- 
plete. A memory barrier ensures that all memory accesses that were initiated by 
the processor prior to the memory barrier have completed before any memory 
accesses initiated after the memory barrier can complete. 
I A "memory barrier" is a moving wall, not a "cache flush" command. 
A common misconception about memory barriers is that they "flush" values to 
main memory, thus ensuring that the values are visible to other processors. That 
is not the case, however. What memory barriers do is ensure an order between 
sets of operations. If each memory access is an item in a queue, you can think of 
a memory barrier as a special queue token. Unlike other memory accesses, how- 
ever, the memory controller cannot remove the barrier, or look past it, until it has 
completed all previous accesses. 
A mutex lock, for example, begins by locking the mutex, and completes by 
issuing a memory barrier. The result is that any memory accesses issued while 
the mutex is locked cannot complete before other threads can see that the mutex 
was locked. Similarly, a mutex unlock begins by issuing a memory barrier and 
completes by unlocking the mutex, ensuring that memory accesses issued while 
the mutex is locked cannot complete after other threads can see that the mutex is 
unlocked. 
This memory barrier model is the logic behind my description of the Pthreads 
memory rules. For each of the rules, we have a "source" event, such as a thread 
calling pthread_mutex_unlock, and a "destination" event, such as another thread 
returning from pthread_mutex_lock. The passage of "memory view" from the first 
to the second occurs because of the memory barriers carefully placed in each. 
Even without read/write ordering and memory barriers, it may seem that 
writes to a single memory address must be atomic, meaning that another thread 
will always see either the intact original value or the intact new value. But that's 
not always true, either. Most computers have a natural memory granularity, 
which depends on the organization of memory and the bus architecture. Even if 
the processor naturally reads and writes 8-bit units, memory transfers may occur 
in 32- or 64-bit "memory units." 
That may mean that 8-bit writes aren't atomic with respect to other memory 
operations that overlap the same 32- or 64-bit unit. Most computers write the full 
memory unit (say, 32 bits) that contains the data you're modifying. If two threads 
write different 8-bit values within the same 32-bit memory unit, the result may 
be that the last thread to write the memory unit specifies the value of both bytes, 
overwriting the value supplied by the first writer. Figure 3.8 shows this effect. 
94 
CHAPTER 3 Synchronization 
thread 1 
memory 
00 I 01 I 02l~0lf 
each reads the value 
each modifies a byte 
each writes a new value 
00 | 14 | 02~j~03 ! ? 
thread 1 wins: liliis lime) 
thread 2 
00 | 
00 i 
01 
01 
| 02 
| 25 
i 25 
03 
03 
FIGURE 3.8 Memory conflict 
If a variable crosses the boundary between memory units, which can happen 
if the machine supports unaligned memory access, the computer may have to 
send the data in two bus transactions. An unaligned 32-bit value, for example, 
may be sent by writing the two adjacent 32-bit memory units. If either memory 
unit involved in the transaction is simultaneously written from another proces- 
sor, half of the value may be lost. This is called "word tearing," and is shown in 
Figure 3.9. 
We have finally returned to the advice at the beginning of this section: If you 
want to write portable Pthreads code, you will always guarantee correct memory 
visibility by using the Pthreads memory visibility rules instead of relying on any 
assumptions regarding the hardware or compiler behavior. But now, at the bot- 
tom of the section, you have some understanding of why this is true. For a 
substantially more in-depth treatment of multiprocessor memory architecture, 
refer to UNIX Systems for Modern Architectures [Schimmel, 1994]. 
Figure 3.10 shows the same sequence as Figure 3.7, but it uses a mutex to 
ensure the desired read/write ordering. Figure 3.10 does not show the cache 
flush steps that are shown in Figure 3.7, because those steps are no longer rele- 
vant. Memory visibility is guaranteed by passing mutex ownership in steps t+3 
and t+4, through the associated memory barriers. That is, when thread 2 has 
Memory visibility between threads 
95 
00 
00 
thread 1 
01 
14 
14 
/ 
/ 
02 
02 
\ 
\ 
|xx 
03 
03 
XX 
memory (unaligned value) 
xx | 00 | 01 02 | 03 | xx 
each reads the value 
each modifies a byte 
each writes a new value 
[ xx 00 14 | 25 j 03 xx 
Each thread has written 16 bits of the 32 
XX 
| 00 
00 
XX 
thread 2 
\ 
\ 
01 
01 | 
/ 
/ 
bit value 
02 
T" 
25 
03 ; 
03 
FIGURE 3.9 Word tearing 
successfully locked the mutex previously unlocked by thread 1, thread 2 is guar- 
anteed to see memory values "at least as recent" as the values visible to thread 1 
at the time it unlocked the mutex. 
Time 
t 
t+1 
t+2 
t+3 
t+4 
t+5 
t+6 
t+7 
Thread 1 
lock mutex 
(memory barrier) 
write " to address 1 
write " to address 2 
(memory barrier) 
unlock mutex 
(cache) 
(cache) 
Thread 2 
lock mutex 
(memory barrier) 
read " from address 1 
read " from address 2 
(memory barrier) 
unlock mutex 
FIGURE 3.10 Memory ordering with synchronization 
4 A few ways to use threads 
"They were obliged to have him with them," the Mock Turtle said. 
"No wise fish would go anywhere without a porpoise." 
"Wouldn't it, really?" said Alice, in a tone of great surprise. 
"Of course not," said the Mock Turtle. "Why, if a fish came to me, 
and told me he was going on a journey, I should say 'With what porpoise?'" 
！Lewis Carroll, Alice's Adventures in Wonderland 
During the introduction to this book, I mentioned some of the ways you can 
structure a threaded solution to a problem. There are infinite variations, but the 
primary models of threaded programming are shown in Table 4.1. 
Pipeline 
Work crew 
Client/server 
Each thread repeatedly performs the same operation on a 
sequence of data sets, passing each result to another thread for 
the next step. This is also known as an "assembly line." 
Each thread performs an operation on its own data. Threads in 
a work crew may all perform the same operation, or each a sep- 
arate operation, but they always proceed independently. 
A client "contracts" with an independent server for each job. 
Often the "contract" is anonymous！a request is made through 
some interface that queues the work item. 
TABLE 4.1 Thread programming models 
All of these models can be combined in arbitrary ways and modified beyond all 
recognition to fit individual situations. A step in a pipeline could involve request- 
ing a service from a server thread, and the server might use a work crew, and one 
or more workers in the crew might use a pipeline. Or a parallel search "engine" 
might initiate several threads, each trying a different search algorithm. 
97 
98 
CHAPTER 4 A few ways to use threads 
4.1 Pipeline 
"/ want a clean cup," interrupted the Hatter: "let's all move one place on." 
He moved on as he spoke, and the Dormouse followed him: the March Hare 
moved into the Dormouse's place, and Alice rather unwillingly took the 
place of the March Hare. The Hatter was the only one who got any 
advantage from the change; and Alice was a good deal worse off than 
before, as the March Hare had just upset the milk-jug into his plate. 
！Lewis Carroll, Alice's Adventures in Wonderland 
In pipelining, a stream of "data items" is processed serially by an ordered set 
of threads (Figure 4.1). Each thread performs a specific operation on each item in 
sequence, passing the data on to the next thread in the pipeline. 
For example, the data might be a scanned image, and thread A might process 
an image array, thread B might search the processed data for a specific set of fea- 
tures, and thread C might collect the serial stream of search results from thread B 
into a report. Or each thread might perform a single step in some sequence of 
modifications on the data. 
The following program, called pipe.c, shows the pieces of a simple pipeline 
program. Each thread in the pipeline increments its input value by 1 and passes 
it to the next thread. The main program reads a series of "command lines" from 
stdin. A command line is either a number, which is fed into the beginning of the 
pipeline, or the character "=," which causes the program to read the next result 
from the end of the pipeline and print it to stdout. 
Input 
Thread A I 
Output 
FIGURE 4.1 Pipelining 
Pipeline 99 
9-17 Each stage of a pipeline is represented by a variable of type staget. staget 
contains a mutex to synchronize access to the stage. The avail condition variable 
is used to signal a stage that data is ready for it to process, and each stage signals 
its own ready condition variable when it is ready for new data. The data member 
is the data passed from the previous stage, thread is the thread operating this 
stage, and next is a pointer to the following stage. 
23-29 The pipe_t structure describes a pipeline. It provides pointers to the first and 
last stage of a pipeline. The first stage, head, represents the first thread in the 
pipeline. The last stage, tail, is a special stage_t that has no thread！it is a 
place to store the final result of the pipeline. 
| pipe.c part 1 definitions 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
|include <pthread.h> 
|include "errors.h" 
/* 
* Internal structure 
* pipeline. One for 
describing a 
"stage" in the 
each thread, plus a "result 
* stage" where the final thread can stash the value. 
*/ 
typedef struct stage 
pthread mutex t 
pthread cond t 
pthread cond t 
int ~ 
long 
pthread t 
struct stage tag 
} stage_t; 
/* 
* External structure 
* pipeline. 
*/ 
tag { 
mutex; 
avail; 
ready; 
data ready; 
data; 
thread; 
*next; 
representing 
typedef struct pipe tag { 
pthread mutex t 
stage t 
stage t 
int 
int 
} pipe_t; 
mutex; 
*head; 
*tail; 
stages; 
active; 
/* Protect data */ 
/* Data available */ 
/* Ready for data */ 
: /* Data present */ 
/* Data to process */ 
/* Thread for stage */ 
/* Next stage */ 
the entire 
/* Mutex to protect pipe */ 
/* First stage */ 
/* Final stage */ 
/* Number of stages */ 
/* Active data elements */ 
pipe.c part 1 definitions 
Part 2 shows pipesend, a utility function used to start data along a pipeline, 
and also called by each stage to pass data to the next stage. 
100 CHAPTER 4 A few ways to wse threads 
17-23 It begins by waiting on the specified pipeline stage's ready condition variable 
until it can accept new data. 
28-30 Store the new data value, and then tell the stage that data is available. 
| pipe.c part 2 pipe_senc 
1 /* 
2 * Internal function to send a "message" to the 
3 * specified pipe stage. Threads use this to pass 
4 * along the modified data item. 
5 */ 
6 int pipe_send (stage_t *stage, long data) 
7 { 
8 int status; 
9 
10 status = pthread_mutex_lock (&stage->mutex); 
11 if (status != 0) 
12 return status; 
13 /* 
14 * If there's data in the pipe stage, wait for it 
15 * to be consumed. 
16 */ 
17 while (stage->data_ready) { 
18 status = pthread_cond_wait (&stage->ready, &stage->mutex); 
19 if (status != 0) { 
20 pthread_mutex_unlock (&stage->mutex); 
21 return status; 
22 } 
23 } 
24 
25 /* 
26 * Send the new data 
27 */ 
28 stage->data = data; 
29 stage->data_ready = 1; 
30 status = pthread_cond_signal (&stage->avail); 
31 if (status != 0) { 
32 pthread_mutex_unlock (&stage->mutex); 
33 return status; 
34 } 
35 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (&stage->mutex); 
36 return status; 
37 } 
| pipe.c part 2 pipe_send 
Part 3 shows pipe_stage, the start function for each thread in the pipeline. 
The thread's argument is a pointer to its stage_t structure. 
16-27 The thread loops forever, processing data. Because the mutex is locked out- 
side the loop, the thread appears to have the pipeline stage's mutex locked all the 
Pipeline 101 
time. However, it spends most of its time waiting for new data, on the avail con- 
dition variable. Remember that a thread automatically unlocks the mutex 
associated with a condition variable, while waiting on that condition variable. In 
reality, therefore, the thread spends most of its time with mutex unlocked. 
22-26 When given data, the thread increases its own data value by one, and passes 
the result to the next stage. The thread then records that the stage no longer has 
data by clearing the data_ready flag, and signals the ready condition variable to 
wake any thread that might be waiting for this pipeline stage. 
| pipe.c part 3 pipe_stage 
1 /* 
2 * The thread start routine for pipe stage threads. 
3 * Each will wait for a data item passed from the 
4 * caller or the previous stage, modify the data 
5 * and pass it along to the next (or final) stage. 
6 */ 
7 void *pipe_stage (void *arg) 
8 { 
9 stage_t *stage = (stage_t*)arg; 
10 stage_t *next_stage = stage->next; 
11 int status; 
12 
13 status = pthread_mutex_lock (&stage->mutex); 
14 if (status != 0) 
15 err_abort (status, "Lock pipe stage"); 
16 while A) { 
17 while (stage->data_ready != 1) { 
18 status = pthread_cond_wait (&stage->avail, &stage->mutex); 
19 if (status != 0) 
20 err_abort (status, "Wait for previous stage"); 
21 } 
22 pipe_send (next_stage, stage->data + 1); 
23 stage->data_ready =0; 
24 status = pthread_cond_signal (&stage->ready); 
25 if (status != 0) 
26 err_abort (status, "Wake next stage"); 
27 } 
28 /* 
29 * Notice that the routine never unlocks the stage->mutex. 
30 * The call to pthread_cond_wait implicitly unlocks the 
31 * mutex while the thread is waiting, allowing other threads 
32 * to make progress. Because the loop never terminates, this 
33 * function has no need to unlock the mutex explicitly. 
34 */ 
35 } 
| pipe.c part 3 pipe_stage 
102 CHAPTER 4 A few ways to use threads 
Part 4 shows pipe_create, the function that creates a pipeline. It can create a 
pipeline of any number of stages, linking them together in a list. 
18-34 For each stage, it allocates a new stage_t structure and initializes the mem- 
bers. Notice that one additional "stage" is allocated and initialized to hold the 
final result of the pipeline. 
36-37 The link member of the final stage is set to NULL to terminate the list, and the 
pipeline's tail is set to point at the final stage. The tail pointer allows pipe_ 
result to easily find the final product of the pipeline, which is stored into the 
final stage. 
52-59 After all the stage data is initialized, pipe_create creates a thread for each 
stage. The extra "final stage" does not get a thread！the termination condition of 
the for loop is that the current stage's next link is not NULL, which means that it 
will not process the final stage. 
| pipe.c part 4 pipe_create 
1 /* 
2 * External interface to create a pipeline. All the 
3 * data is initialized and the threads created. They'll 
4 * wait for data. 
5 */ 
6 int pipe_create (pipe_t *pipe, int stages) 
l { 
8 int pipe_index; 
9 stage_t **link = &pipe->head, *new_stage, *stage; 
10 int status; 
11 
12 status = pthread_mutex_init (&pipe->mutex, NULL); 
13 if (status != 0) 
14 err_abort (status, "Init pipe mutex"); 
15 pipe->stages = stages; 
16 pipe->active = 0; 
17 
18 for (pipe_index =0; pipe_index <= stages; pipe_index++) { 
19 new_stage = (stage_t*)malloc (sizeof (stage_t)); 
20 if (new_stage == NULL) 
21 errno_abort ("Allocate stage"); 
22 status = pthread_mutex_init (&new_stage->mutex, NULL); 
23 if (status != 0) 
24 err_abort (status, "Init stage mutex"); 
25 status = pthread_cond_init (&new_stage->avail, NULL); 
26 if (status != 0) 
27 err_abort (status, "Init avail condition"); 
28 status = pthread_cond_init (&new_stage->ready, NULL); 
29 if (status != 0) 
30 err_abort (status, "Init ready condition"); 
31 new_stage->data_ready = 0; 
32 *link = new_stage; 
Pipeline 103 
33 link = &new_stage->next; 
34 } 
35 
36 *link = (stage_t*)NULL; /* Terminate list */ 
37 pipe->tail = new__stage; /* Record the tail */ 
38 
39 /* 
40 * Create the threads for the pipe stages only after all 
41 * the data is initialized (including all links). Note 
42 * that the last stage doesn't get a thread, it's just 
43 * a receptacle for the final pipeline value. 
44 * 
45 * At this point, proper cleanup on an error would take up 
46 * more space than worthwhile in a "simple example," so 
47 * instead of cancelling and detaching all the threads 
48 * already created, plus the synchronization object and 
49 * memory cleanup done for earlier errors, it will simply 
50 * abort. 
51 */ 
52 for ( stage = pipe->head; 
53 stage->next != NULL; 
54 stage = stage->next) { 
55 status = pthread_create ( 
56 &stage->thread, NULL, pipe_stage, (void*)stage); 
57 if (status != 0) 
58 err_abort (status, "Create pipe stage"); 
59 } 
60 return 0; 
61 } 
| pipe.c part 4 pipe_create 
Part 5 shows pipe_start and pipe_result. The pipe_start function pushes 
an item of data into the beginning of the pipeline and then returns immediately 
without waiting for a result. The pipe_result function allows the caller to wait 
for the final result, whenever the result might be needed. 
5-22 The pipe_start function sends data to the first stage of the pipeline. The 
function increments a count of "active" items in the pipeline, which allows pipe_ 
result to detect that there are no more active items to collect, and to return 
immediately instead of blocking. You would not always want a pipeline to behave 
this way！it makes sense for this example because a single thread alternately 
"feeds" and "reads" the pipeline, and the application would hang forever if the 
user inadvertently reads one more item than had been fed. 
: = -47 The pipe_result function first checks whether there is an active item in the 
pipeline. If not, it returns with a status of 0, after unlocking the pipeline mutex. 
4 5-55 If there is another item in the pipeline, pipe_result locks the tail (final) 
stage, and waits for it to receive data. It copies the data and then resets the stage 
so it can receive the next item of data. Remember that the final stage does not 
have a thread, and cannot reset itself. 
104 chapter 4 A few ways to use threads 
| pipe.c part 5 pipe_start,pipe_result 
1 /* 
2 * External interface to start a pipeline by passing 
3 * data to the first stage. The routine returns while 
4 * the pipeline processes in parallel. Call the 
5 * pipe_result return to collect the final stage values 
6 * (note that the pipe will stall when each stage fills, 
7 * until the result is collected). 
8 */ 
9 int pipe_start (pipe_t *pipe, long value) 
10 { 
11 int status; 
12 
13 status = pthread_mutex_lock (&pipe->mutex); 
14 if (status != 0) 
15 err_abort (status, "Lock pipe mutex"); 
16 pipe->active++; 
17 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (&pipe->mutex); 
18 if (status != 0) 
19 err_abort (status, "Unlock pipe mutex"); 
20 pipe_send (pipe->head, value); 
21 return 0; 
22 } 
23 
24 /* 
25 * Collect the result of the pipeline. Wait for a 
26 * result if the pipeline hasn't produced one. 
27 */ 
28 int pipe_result (pipe_t *pipe, long *result) 
29 { 
30 stage_t *tail = pipe->tail; 
31 long value; 
32 int empty = 0; 
33 int status; 
34 
35 status = pthread_mutex_lock (&pipe->mutex); 
36 if (status != 0) 
37 err_abort (status, "Lock pipe mutex"); 
38 if (pipe->active <= 0) 
39 empty = 1; 
40 else 
41 pipe->active！; 
42 
43 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (&pipe->mutex); 
44 if (status != 0) 
45 err_abort (status, "Unlock pipe mutex"); 
46 if (empty) 
4 7 return 0; 
48 
49 pthread mutex lock (&tail->mutex); 
Pipeline 105 
50 while (!tail->data_ready) 
51 pthread_cond_wait (&tail->avail, &tail->mutex); 
52 *result = tail->data; 
53 tail->data_ready = 0; 
54 pthread_cond_signal (&tail->ready); 
55 pthread_mutex_unlock (&tail->mutex); 
56 return 1; 
57 } 
| pipe.c part 5 pipe_start,pipe_result 
Part 6 shows the main program that drives the pipeline. It creates a pipeline, 
and then loops reading lines from stdin. If the line is a single "=" character, it 
pulls a result from the pipeline and prints it. Otherwise, it converts the line to an 
integer value, which it feeds into the pipeline. 
| pipe.c part 6 main 
1 /* 
2 * The main program to "drive" the pipeline... 
3 */ 
4 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
5 { 
6 pipe_t my_pipe; 
7 long value, result; 
8 int status; 
9 char line[128]; 
10 
11 pipe_create (&my_pipe, 10); 
12 printf ("Enter integer values, or \"=\" for next result\n"); 
13 
14 while A) { 
15 printf ("Data> "); 
16 if (fgets (line, sizeof (line), stdin) == NULL) exit @); 
17 if (strlen (line) <= 1) continue; 
18 if (strlen (line) <= 2 && line[0] == '=') { 
19 if (pipe_result (&my_pipe, fcresult)) 
20 printf ("Result is %ld\n", result); 
21 else 
22 printf ("Pipe is empty\n"); 
23 } else { 
24 if (sscanf (line, "%ld", svalue) < 1) 
25 fprintf (stderr, "Enter an integer value\n"); 
26 else 
27 pipe_start (&my_pipe, value); 
28 } 
29 } 
30 } 
| pipe.c part 6 main 
106 
CHAPTER 4 A few ways to use threads 
4.2 Work crew 
The twelve jurors were all writing very busily on slates. 
"What are they doing?" Alice whispered to the Gryphon. 
"They ca'n't have anything to put down yet, before the trial's begun." 
"They're putting down their names," the Gryphon whispered in reply, 
"for fear they should forget them before the end of the trial." 
！Lewis Carroll, Alice's Adventures in Wonderland 
In a work crew, data is processed independently by a set of threads 
{Figure 4.2). A "parallel decomposition" of a loop generally falls into this category. 
A set of threads may be created, for example, each directed to process some set of 
rows or columns of an array. A single set of data is split between the threads, and 
the result is a single (filtered) set of data. Because all the threads in the work 
crew, in this model, are performing the same operation on different data, it is 
often known as SIMD parallel processing, for "single instruction, multiple data." 
The original use of SIMD was in an entirely different form of parallelism, and 
doesn't literally apply to threads！but the concept is similar. 
The threads in a work crew don't have to use a SIMD model, though. They 
may perform entirely different operations on different data. The members of our 
work crew, for example, each remove work requests from a shared queue, and do 
whatever is required by that request. Each queued request packet could describe 
Input 
Thread B 
Output 
FIGURE 4.2 Work crew 
Work crew 107 
a variety of operations！but the common queue and "mission statement" (to pro- 
cess that queue) make them a "crew" rather than independent worker threads. 
This model can be compared to the original definition of MIMD parallel process- 
ing, "multiple instruction, multiple data." 
Section 7.2, by the way, shows the development of a more robust and general 
(and more complicated) "work queue manager" package. A "work crew" and a 
"work queue" are related in much the same way as "invariants" and "critical sec- 
tions"！it depends on how you look at what's happening. A work crew is the set of 
threads that independently processes data, whereas a work queue is a mecha- 
nism by which your code may request that data be processed by anonymous and 
independent "agents." So in this section, we develop a "work crew," whereas in 
Section 7.2 we develop a more sophisticated "work queue." The focus differs, but 
the principle is the same. 
The following program, called crew, c, shows a simple work crew. Run the pro- 
gram with two arguments, a string, and a file path. The program will queue the 
file path to the work crew. A crew member will determine whether the file path is 
a file or a directory！if a file, it will search the file for the string; if a directory, it 
will use readdir_r to find all directories and regular files within the directory, 
and queue each entry as new work. Each file containing the search string will be 
reported on stdout. 
Part 1 shows the header files and definitions used by the program. 
7 The symbol CREW_siZE determines how many threads are created for each 
work crew. 
13-17 Each item of work is described by a work_t structure. This structure has a 
pointer to the next work item (set to null to indicate the end of the list), a pointer 
to the file path described by the work item, and a pointer to the string for which 
the program is searching. As currently constructed, all work items point to the 
same search string. 
23-27 Each member of a work crew has a worker_t structure. This structure con- 
tains the index of the crew member in the crew vector, the thread identifier of the 
crew member (thread), and a pointer to the crew_t structure (crew). 
33-41 The crew_t structure describes the work crew state. It records the number of 
members in the work crew (crew_size) and an array of worker_t structures 
(crew). It also has a counter of how many work items remain to be processed 
(work_count) and a list of outstanding work items (first points to the earliest 
item, and last to the latest). Finally, it contains the various Pthreads synchroni- 
zation objects: a mutex to control access, a condition variable (done) to wait for 
the work crew to finish a task, and a condition variable on which crew members 
wait to receive new work (go). 
43-44 The allowed size of a file name and path name may vary depending on the file 
system to which the path leads. When a crew is started, the program calculates 
the allowable file name and path length for the specified file path by calling path- 
conf, and stores the values in path_max and name_max, respectively, for later use. 
108 CHAPTER 4 A Jew ways to use threads 
i 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
C. 
O 
7 
Q 
0 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 
38 
39 
40 
41 
42 
43 
44 
| crew.c 
|include <sys/types.h> 
|include <pthread.h> 
|include <sys/stat.h> 
|include <dirent.h> 
|include "errors.h" 
|define CREW_SIZE 
/* 
* Queued items of work 
* crew start, and each 
*/ 
typedef struct work tag 
struct work tag 
char 
char 
} work t, *work_p; 
/* 
4 
for the crew. One 
worker may 
{ 
*next; 
*path; 
|string; 
* One of these is initialized for 
* crew. It contains the "identity' 
*/ 
typedef struct worker tag { 
int 
pthread t 
struct crew tag 
} worker t, *worker p; 
/* 
* The external "handle1 
* crew synchronization 
*/ 
typedef struct crew tag 
int 
worker t 
long 
work t 
pthread mutex t 
pthread cond t 
pthread cond t 
} crew_t, *crew p; 
size t path max; 
size t name max; 
index; 
thread; 
*crew; 
part 1 definitions 
is queued by 
queue additional items. 
/* 
/* 
/* 
Next work item */ 
Directory or file */ 
Search string */ 
each worker thread in the 
1 of each worker. 
/* 
/* 
/* 
1 for a work crew. 
state and ? 
{ 
crew size; 
staging 
/* 
crew[CREW_SIZE];/* 
work count; 
: /* 
*first, *last; /* 
mutex; 
done; 
go; 
/* 
/* 
/* 
/* 
/* 
Thread's index */ 
Thread for stage */ 
Pointer to crew */ 
Contains the 
area. 
Size of array */ 
Crew members */ 
Count of work items */ 
First & last work item */ 
Mutex for crew data */ 
Wait for crew done */ 
Wait for work */ 
Filepath length */ 
Name length */ 
part 1 definitions 
Work crew 109 
Part 2 shows worker_routine, the start function for crew threads. The outer 
loop repeats processing until the thread is told to terminate. 
20-23 POSIX is a little ambiguous about the actual size of the struct dirent type. 
The actual requirement for readdir_r is that you pass the address of a buffer 
large enough to contain a struct dirent with a name member of at least NAME_ 
max bytes. To ensure that we have enough space, allocate a buffer the size of the 
system's struct dirent plus the maximum size necessary for a file name on the 
file system we're using. This may be bigger than necessary, but it surely won't be 
too small. 
33-37 This condition variable loop blocks each new crew member until work is made 
available. 
61-65 This wait is a little different. While the work list is empty, wait for more work. 
The crew members never terminate！once they're all done with the current 
assignment, they're ready for a new assignment. (This example doesn't take 
advantage of that capability！the process will terminate once the single search 
command has completed.) 
73-76 Remove the first work item from the queue. If the queue becomes empty, also 
clear the pointer to the last entry, crew->last. 
81-83 Unlock the work crew mutex, so that the bulk of the crew's work can proceed 
concurrently. 
89 Determine what sort of file we've got in the work item's path string. We use 
lstat, which will return information for a symbolic link, rather than stat, which 
would return information for the file to which the link pointed. By not following 
symbolic links, we reduce the amount of work in this example, and, especially, 
avoid following links into other file systems where our namejmax and path_max 
sizes may not be sufficient. 
91-95 If the file is a link, report the name, but do nothing else with it. Note that each 
message includes the thread's work crew index (mine->index), so that you can 
easily see "concurrency at work" within the example. 
96-165 If the file is a directory, open it with opendir. Find all entries in the directory 
by repeatedly calling readdir_r. Each directory entry is entered as a new work 
item. 
166-206 If the file is a regular file, open it and read all text, looking for the search 
string. If we find it, write a message and exit the search loop. 
207-218 If the file is of any other type, write a message attempting to identify the type. 
232-252 Relock the work crew mutex, and report that another work item is done. If the 
count reaches 0, then the crew has completed the assignment, and we broadcast 
to awaken any threads waiting to issue a new assignment. Note that the work 
count is decreased only after the work item is fully processed！the count will 
never reach 0 if any crew member is still busy (and might queue additional direc- 
tory entries). 
110 CHAPTER 4 A few ways to use threads 
| crew.c part 2 worker_routine 
1 /* 
2 * The thread start routine for crew threads. Waits until "go" 
3 * command, processes work items until requested to shut down. 
4 */ 
5 void *worker_routine (void *arg) 
6 { 
7 worker_p mine = (worker_t*)arg; 
8 crew_p crew = mine->crew; 
9 work_p work, new_work; 
10 struct stat filestat; 
11 struct dirent *entry; 
12 int status; 
13 
14 /* 
15 * "struct dirent" is funny, because POSIX doesn't require 
16 * the definition to be more than a header for a variable 
17 * buffer. Thus, allocate a "big chunk" of memory, and use 
18 * it as a buffer. 
19 */ 
20 entry = (struct dirent*)malloc ( 
21 sizeof (struct dirent) + name_max); 
22 if (entry == NULL) 
23 errno_abort ("Allocating dirent"); 
24 
25 status = pthread_mutex_lock (Screw->mutex); 
26 if (status != 0) 
27 err_abort (status, "Lock crew mutex"); 
28 
29 /* 
30 * There won't be any work when the crew is created, so wait 
31 * until something's put on the queue. 
32 */ 
33 while (crew->work_count ==0) { 
34 status = pthread_cond_wait (&crew->go, &crew->mutex); 
35 if (status != 0) 
36 err_abort (status, "Wait for go"); 
37 } 
38 
39 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (&crew->mutex); 
40 if (status != 0) 
41 err_abort (status, "Unlock mutex"); 
42 
43 DPRINTF (("Crew %d starting\n", mine->index)); 
44 
45 /* 
46 * Now, as long as there's work, keep doing it. 
47 */ 
Work crew 111 
48 while A) { 
49 /* 
50 * Wait while there is nothing to do, and 
51 * the hope of something coming along later. If 
52 * crew->first is NULL, there's no work. But if 
53 * crew->work_count goes to zero, we're done. 
54 */ 
55 status = pthread_mutex_lock (&crew->mutex); 
56 if (status != 0) 
57 err_abort (status, "Lock crew mutex"); 
58 
59 DPRINTF (("Crew %d top: first is %#lx, count is %d\n", 
60 mine->index, crew->first, crew->work_count)); 
61 while (crew->first == NULL) { 
62 status = pthread_cond_wait (&crew->go, &crew->mutex); 
63 if (status != 0) 
64 err_abort (status, "Wait for work"); 
65 } 
66 
67 DPRINTF (("Crew %d woke: %#lx, %d\n", 
68 mine->index, crew->first, crew->work_count)); 
69 
70 /* 
71 * Remove and process a work item. 
72 */ 
73 work = crew->first; 
74 crew->first = work->next; 
75 if (crew->first == NULL) 
76 crew->last = NULL; 
77 
78 DPRINTF (("Crew %d took %#lx, leaves first %#lx, last %#lx\n", 
79 mine->index, work, crew->first, crew->last)); 
80 
81 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (&crew->mutex); 
82 if (status != 0) 
83 err_abort (status, "Unlock mutex"); 
84 
85 /* 
86 * We have a work item. Process it, which may involve 
87 * queuing new work items. 
88 */ 
89 status = lstat (work->path, Sfilestat); 
90 
91 if (S_ISLNK (filestat.st_mode)) 
92 printf ( 
93 "Thread %d: %s is a link, skipping.\n", 
94 mine->index, 
95 work->path); 
96 else if (S ISDIR (filestat.st mode)) { 
112 CHAPTER 4 A few ways to use threads 
97 DIR *directory; 
98 struct dirent *result; 
99 
100 /* 
101 * If the file is a directory, search it and place 
102 * all files onto the queue as new work items. 
103 */ 
104 directory = opendir (work->path); 
105 if (directory == NULL) { 
106 fprintf ( 
107 stderr, "Unable to open directory %s: %d (%s)\n", 
108 work->path, 
109 errno, strerror (errno)); 
110 continue; 
111 } 
112 
113 while A) { 
114 status = readdir_r (directory, entry, Sresult); 
115 if (status != 0) { 
116 fprintf ( 
117 stderr, 
118 "Unable to read directory %s: %d (%s)\n", 
119 work->path, 
120 status, strerror (status)); 
121 break; 
122 } 
123 if (result == NULL) 
124 break; /* End of directory */ 
125 
126 /* 
127 * Ignore "." and ".." entries. 
128 */ 
129 if (strcmp (entry->d_name, ".") == 0) 
130 continue; 
131 if (strcmp (entry->d_name, "..") == 0) 
132 continue; 
133 new_work = (work_p)malloc (sizeof (work_t)); 
134 if (new_work == NULL) 
135 errno_abort ("Unable to allocate space"); 
136 new_work->path = (char*)malloc (path_max); 
137 if (new_work->path == NULL) 
138 errno_abort ("Unable to allocate path"); 
139 strcpy (new_work->path, work->path); 
140 strcat (new_work->path, "/"); 
141 strcat (new_work->path, entry->d_name); 
142 new_work->string = work->string; 
143 new_work->next = NULL; 
144 status = pthread_mutex_lock (screw->mutex); 
Work crew 113 
145 if (status != 0) 
146 err_abort (status, "Lock mutex"); 
147 if (crew->first == NULL) { 
148 crew->first = new_work; 
149 crew->last = new_work; 
150 } else { 
151 crew->last->next = new_work; 
152 crew->last = new_work; 
153 } 
154 crew->work_count++; 
155 DPRINTF (( 
156 "Crew %d: add %#lx, first %#lx, last %#lx, %d\n", 
157 mine->index, new_work, crew->first, 
158 crew->last, crew->work_count)); 
159 status = pthread_cond_signal (&crew->go); 
160 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (&crew->mutex); 
161 if (status != 0) 
162 err_abort (status, "Unlock mutex"); 
163 } 
164 
165 closedir (directory); 
166 } else if (S_ISREG (filestat.st_mode)) { 
167 FILE *search; 
168 char buffer[256], *bufptr, *search_ptr; 
169 
170 /* 
171 * If this is a file, not a directory, then search 
172 * it for the string. 
173 */ 
174 search = fopen (work->path, "r"); 
175 if (search == NULL) 
176 fprintf ( 
177 stderr, "Unable to open %s: %d (%s)\n", 
178 work->path, 
179 errno, strerror (errno)); 
180 else { 
181 
182 while A) { 
183 bufptr = fgets ( 
184 buffer, sizeof (buffer), search); 
185 if (bufptr == NULL) { 
186 if (feof (search)) 
187 break; 
188 if (ferror (search)) { 
189 fprintf ( 
190 stderr, 
191 "Unable to read %s: %d (%s)\n", 
192 work->path, 
114 CHAPTER 4 A Jew ways to use threads 
193 errno, strerror (errno)); 
194 break; 
195 } 
196 } 
197 search_ptr = strstr (buffer, work->string); 
198 if (search_ptr != NULL) { 
199 printf ( 
200 "Thread %d found \"%s\" in %s\n", 
201 mine->index, work->string, work->path); 
202 break; 
203 } 
204 } 
205 fclose (search); 
206 } 
207 } else 
208 fprintf ( 
209 stderr, 
210 "Thread %d: %s is type %o (%s))\n", 
211 mine->index, 
212 work->path, 
213 filestat.st_mode & S_IFMT, 
214 (S_ISFIFO (filestat.st_mode) ? "FIFO" 
215 : (S_ISCHR (filestat.st_mode) ? "CHR" 
216 : (S_ISBLK (filestat.st_mode) ? "BLK" 
217 : (S_ISSOCK (filestat.st_mode) ? "SOCK" 
218 : "unknown"))))); 
219 
220 free (work->path); /* Free path buffer */ 
221 free (work); /* We're done with this */ 
222 
223 /* 
224 * Decrement count of outstanding work items, and wake 
225 * waiters (trying to collect results or start a new 
226 * calculation) if the crew is now idle. 
227 * 
228 * It's important that the count be decremented AFTER 
229 * processing the current work item. That ensures the 
230 * count won't go to 0 until we're really done. 
231 */ 
232 status = pthread_mutex_lock (screw->mutex); 
233 if (status != 0) 
234 err_abort (status, "Lock crew mutex"); 
235 
236 crew->work_count！; 
237 DPRINTF (("Crew %d decremented work to %d\n", mine->index, 
238 crew->work_count)); 
239 if (crew->work_count <= 0) { 
240 DPRINTF (("Crew thread %d done\n", mine->index)); 
241 status = pthread cond broadcast (&crew->done); 
Work crew 115 
242 if (status != 0) 
243 err_abort (status, "Wake waiters"); 
244 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (Screw->mutex); 
245 if (status != 0) 
246 err_abort (status, "Unlock mutex"); 
247 break; 
248 } 
249 
250 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (Screw->mutex); 
251 if (status != 0) 
252 err_abort (status, "Unlock mutex"); 
253 
254 } 
255 
256 free (entry); 
257 return NULL; 
258 } 
| crew.c part 2 worker_routine 
Part 3 shows crew_create, the function used to create a new work crew. This 
simple example does not provide a way to destroy a work crew, because that is 
not necessary！the work crew would be destroyed only when the main program 
was prepared to exit, and process exit will destroy all threads and process data. 
12-15 The crew_create function begins by checking the crew_size argument. The 
size of the crew is not allowed to exceed the size of the crew array in crewt. If the 
requested size is acceptable, copy it into the structure. 
16-31 Start with no work and an empty work queue. Initialize the crew's synchroni- 
zation objects. 
36-43 Then, for each crew member, initialize the member's worker_t data. The index 
of the member within the crew array is recorded, and a pointer back to the crew_t. 
Then the crew member thread is created, with a pointer to the member's workert 
as its argument. 
| crew.c part 3 crew_create 
1 /* 
2 * Create a work crew. 
3 */ 
4 int crew_create (crew_t *crew, int crew_size) 
5 { 
6 int crew_index; 
7 int status; 
8 
9 /* 
10 * We won't create more than CREW_SIZE members. 
11 */ 
116 CHAPTER 4 A Jew ways to use threads 
12 if (crew_size > CREW_SIZE) 
13 return EINVAL; 
14 
15 crew->crew_size = crew_size; 
16 crew->work_count =0; 
17 crew->first = NULL; 
18 crew->last = NULL; 
19 
20 /* 
21 * Initialize synchronization objects. 
22 */ 
23 status = pthread_mutex_init (Screw->mutex, NULL); 
24 if (status != 0) 
25 return status; 
26 status = pthread_cond_init (&crew->done, NULL); 
27 if (status != 0) 
28 return status; 
29 status = pthread_cond_init (&crew->go, NULL); 
30 if (status != 0) 
31 return status; 
32 
33 /* 
34 * Create the worker threads. 
35 */ 
36 for (crew_index = 0; crew_index < CREW_SIZE; crew_index++) { 
37 crew->crew[crew_index].index = crew_index; 
38 crew->crew[crew_index].crew = crew; 
39 status = pthread_create (&crew->crew[crew_index].thread, 
40 NULL, worker_routine, (void*)&crew->crew[crew_index]); 
41 if (status != 0) 
42 err_abort (status, "Create worker"); 
43 } 
44 return 0; 
45 } 
| crew.c part 3 crew_create 
Part 4 shows the crew_start function, which is called to assign a new path 
name and search string to the work crew. The function is synchronous！that is, 
after assigning the task it waits for the crew members to complete the task before 
returning to the caller. The crew_start function assumes that the crew_t struc- 
ture has been previously created by calling crew_create, shown in part 3, but 
does not attempt to validate the structure. 
20-26 Wait for the crew members to finish any previously assigned work. Although 
crew_start is synchronous, the crew may be processing a task assigned by 
another thread. On creation, the crew's work_count is set to 0, so the first call to 
crew start will not need to wait. 
Work crew 117 
28-43 Get the proper values of path_max and name_max for the file system specified 
by the file path we'll be reading. The pathconf function may return a value of-1 
without setting errno, if the requested value for the file system is "unlimited." To 
detect this, we need to clear errno before making the call. If pathconf returns -1 
without setting errno, assume reasonable values. 
47-48 The values returned by pathconf don't include the terminating null character 
of a string！so add one character to both. 
49-67 Allocate a work queue entry (work_t) and fill it in. Add it to the end of the 
request queue. 
68-75 We've queued a single work request, so awaken one of the waiting work crew 
members by signaling the condition variable. If the attempt fails, free the work 
request, clear the work queue, and return with the error. 
76-80 Wait for the crew to complete the task. The crew members handle all output, 
so when they're done we simply return to the caller. 
| crew.c part 4 crew_start 
1 /* 
2 * Pass a file path to a work crew previously created 
3 * using crew_create 
4 */ 
5 int crew_start ( 
6 crew_p crew, 
7 char *filepath, 
8 char *search) 
9 { 
10 workjp request; 
11 int status; 
12 
13 status = pthread_mutex_lock (&crew->mutex); 
14 if (status != 0) 
15 return status; 
16 
17 /* 
18 * If the crew is busy, wait for them to finish. 
19 */ 
20 while (crew->work_count > 0) { 
21 status = pthread_cond_wait (&crew->done, Screw->mutex); 
22 if (status != 0) { 
23 pthread_mutex_unlock (&crew->mutex); 
24 return status; 
25 } 
26 } 
27 
28 errno = 0; 
29 pathjnax = pathconf (filepath, _PC_PATH_MAX); 
118 CHAPTER 4 A few ways to use threads 
30 if (path_max == -1) { 
31 if (errno == 0) 
32 path_max = 1024; /* "No limit" */ 
33 else 
34 errno_abort ("Unable to get PATH_MAX"); 
35 } 
36 errno = 0; 
37 name_max = pathconf (filepath, _PC_NAME_MAX); 
38 if (name_max == -1) { 
39 if (errno == 0) 
40 name_max = 256; /* "No limit" */ 
41 else 
42 errno_abort ("Unable to get NAME_MAX"); 
43 } 
44 DPRINTF (( 
45 "PATH_MAX for %s is %ld, NAME_MAX is %ld\n", 
46 filepath, path_max, name_max)); 
47 path_max++; /* Add null byte */ 
48 name_max++; /* Add null byte */ 
49 request = (work_p)malloc (sizeof (work_t)); 
50 if (request == NULL) 
51 errno_abort ("Unable to allocate request"); 
52 DPRINTF (("Requesting %s\n", filepath)); 
53 request->path = (char*)malloc (path_max); 
54 if (request->path == NULL) 
55 errno_abort ("Unable to allocate path"); 
56 strcpy (request->path, filepath); 
57 request->string = search; 
58 request->next = NULL; 
59 if (crew->first == NULL) { 
60 crew->first = request; 
61 crew->last = request; 
62 } else { 
63 crew->last->next = request; 
64 crew->last = request; 
65 } 
66 
67 crew->work_count++; 
68 status = pthread_cond_signal (&crew->go); 
69 if (status != 0) { 
70 free (crew->first); 
71 crew->first = NULL; 
72 crew->work_count = 0; 
73 pthread_mutex_unlock (&crew->mutex); 
74 return status; 
75 } 
76 while (crew->work_count > 0) { 
77 status = pthread_cond_wait (&crew->done, screw->mutex); 
Work crew 119 
78 if (status != 0) 
79 err_abort (status, "waiting for crew to finish"); 
80 } 
81 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (&crew->mutex); 
82 if (status != 0) 
83 err_abort (status, "Unlock crew mutex"); 
84 return 0; 
85 } 
| crew.c part 4 crew_start 
Part 5 shows the initial thread (main) for the little work crew sample. 
10-13 The program requires three arguments！the program name, a string for which 
to search, and a path name. For example, "crew butenhof ~" 
15-23 On a Solaris system, call thr_setconcurrency to ensure that at least one LWP 
(kernel execution context) is created for each crew member. The program will 
work without this call, but, on a uniprocessor, you would not see any concur- 
rency. See Section 5.6.3 for more information on "many to few" scheduling 
models, and Section 10.1.3 for information on "set concurrency" functions. 
24-30 Create a work crew, and assign to it the concurrent file search. 
| crew.c part 5 main 
1 /* 
2 * The main program to "drive" the crew... 
3 */ 
4 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
5 { 
6 crew_t my_crew; 
7 char line[128], *next; 
8 int status; 
9 
10 if (argc < 3) { 
11 fprintf (stderr, "Usage: %s string path\n", argv[0]); 
12 return -1; 
13 } 
14 ^ 
15 #ifdef sun 
16 /* 
17 * On Solaris 2.5, threads are not timesliced. To ensure 
18 * that our threads can run concurrently, we need to 
19 * increase the concurrency level to CREW_SIZE. 
20 */ 
21 DPRINTF (("Setting concurrency level to %d\n", CREW_SIZE)); 
22 thr_setconcurrency (CREW_SIZE); 
23 #endif 
24 status = crew_create (&my_crew, CREW_SIZE); 
25 if (status != 0) 
26 err abort (status, "Create crew"); 
120 
CHAPTER 4 A few ways to use threads 
27 
28 status = crew_start (&my_crew, argv[2], argv[l]); 
29 if (status != 0) 
30 err_abort (status, "Start crew"); 
31 
32 return 0; 
33 } 
| crew.c 
part 5 main 
4.3 Client/Server 
But the Judge said he never had summed up before; 
So the Snark undertook it instead, 
And summed it so well that it came to far more 
Than the Witnesses ever had said! 
！Lewis Carroll, The Hunting of the Snark 
In a client/server system, a "client" requests that a "server" perform some 
operation on a set of data (Figure 4.3). The server performs the operation inde- 
pendently！the client can either wait for the server or proceed in parallel and look 
for the result at a later time when the result is required. Although it is simplest to 
have the client wait for the server, that's rarely very useful！it certainly doesn't 
Input A 
Output A 
I 
I 
( 
Input B 
---！ ！|！ 
Server 
--！ ！^ 
i 
Output B 
> 
) 
I 
/^ 
^^ 
1 
Input C 
Output C 
1 
? 
FIGURE 4.3 Client I Server 
Client/Server 
121 
7-9 
14-22 
27-33 
35-37 
43-45 
provide a speed advantage to the client. On the other hand, it can be an easy way 
to manage synchronization for some common resource. 
If a set of threads all need to read input from stdin, it might be confusing for 
them to each issue independent prompt-and-read operations. Imagine that two 
threads each writes its prompt using printf, and then each reads the response 
using gets！you would have no way of knowing to which thread you were 
responding. If one thread asks "OK to send mail?" and the other asks "OK to 
delete root directory?" you'd probably like to know which thread will receive your 
response. Of course there are ways to keep the prompt and response "connected" 
without introducing a server thread; for example, by using the flockfile and 
funlockfile functions to lock both stdin and stdout around the prompt-and- 
read sequences, but a server thread is more interesting！and certainly more rele- 
vant to this section. 
In the following program, server, c, each of four threads will repeatedly read, 
and then echo, input lines. When the program is run you should see the threads 
prompt in varying orders, and another thread may prompt before the echo. But 
you'll never see a prompt or an echo between the prompt and read performed by 
the "prompt server." 
These symbols define the commands that can be sent to the "prompt server." 
It can be asked to read input, write output, or quit. 
The request_t structure defines each request to the server. The outstanding 
requests are linked in a list using the next member. The operation member con- 
tains one of the request codes (read, write, or quit). The synchronous member is 
nonzero if the client wishes to wait for the operation to be completed (synchro- 
nous), or 0 if it does not wish to wait (asynchronous). 
The tty_server_t structure provides the context for the server thread. It has 
the synchronization objects (mutex and request), a flag denoting whether the 
server is running, and a list of requests that have been made and not yet pro- 
cessed (first and last). 
This program has a single server, and the control structure (tty_server) is 
statically allocated and initialized here. The list of requests is empty, and the 
server is not running. The mutex and condition variable are statically initialized. 
The main program; and client threads coordinate their shutdown using these 
synchronization objects (client_mutex and clients_done) rather than using 
pthread join. 
server.c 
part 1 definitions 
|include <pthread.h> 
#include <math.h> 
tinclude "errors.h" 
tdefine CLIENT_THREADS 4 
#define REQ_READ 1 
#define REQ WRITE 2 
/* Number of clients */ 
/* Read with prompt */ 
/* Write */ 
122 CHAPTER 4 A few ways to use threads 
9 #define REQ_QUIT 3 /* Quit server */ 
10 
11 /* 
12 * Internal to server "package" ！ one for each request. 
13 */ 
14 typedef struct request_tag { 
15 struct request__tag *next; /* Link to next */ 
16 int operation; /* Function code */ 
17 int synchronous; /* Nonzero if synchronous */ 
18 int done_flag; /* Predicate for wait */ 
19 pthread_cond_t done; /* Wait for completion */ 
20 char prompt[32]; /* Prompt string for reads */ 
21 char text[128]; /* Read/write text */ 
22 } request_t; 
23 
24 /* 
25 * Static context for the server 
26 */ 
27 typedef struct tty_server_tag { 
28 request_t *first; 
29 request_t *last; 
30 int running; 
31 pthread_mutex_t mutex; 
32 pthread_cond_t request; 
33 } tty_server_t; 
34 
35 tty_server_t tty_server = { 
36 NULL, NULL, 0, 
37 PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER, PTHREAD_COND_INITIALIZER>; 
38 
39 /* 
40 * Main program data 
41 */ 
42 
43 int client_threads; 
44 pthread_mutex_t client_mutex = PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER; 
45 pthread_cond_t clients_done = PTHREAD_COND_INITIALIZER; 
| server.c part 1 definitions 
Part 2 shows the server thread function, tty_server_routine. It loops, pro- 
cessing requests continuously until asked to quit. 
25-30 The server waits for a request to appear using the request condition variable. 
31-34 Remove the first request from the queue！if the queue is now empty, also clear 
the pointer to the last entry (ttyserver. last). 
43-66 The switch statement performs the requested work, depending on the opera- 
tion given in the request packet, reqquit tells the server to shut down. req_ 
read tells the server to read, with an optional prompt string. req_write tells the 
server to write a string. 
Client/Server 123 
67-79 If a request is marked "synchronous" (synchronous flag is nonzero), the server 
sets done_f lag and signals the done condition variable. When the request is syn- 
chronous, the client is responsible for freeing the request packet. If the request 
was asynchronous, the server frees request on completion. 
80-81 If the request was REQ_QUIT, terminate the server thread by breaking out of 
the while loop, to the return statement. 
| server.c part 2 tty_server_routine 
1 /* 
2 * The server start routine. It waits for a request to appear 
3 * in tty_server.requests using the request condition variable. 
4 * It processes requests in FIFO order. If a request is marked 
5 * "synchronous" (synchronous != 0), the server will set done_flag 
6 * and signal the request's condition variable. The client is 
7 * responsible for freeing the request. If the request was not 
8 * synchronous, the server will free the request on completion. 
9 */ 
10 void *tty_server_routine (void *arg) 
11 { 
12 static pthread_mutex_t promptjnutex = PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER; 
13 request_t *request; 
14 int operation, len; 
15 int status; 
16 
17 while A) { 
18 status = pthread_mutex_lock (&tty_server.mutex); 
19 if (status != 0) 
20 err_abort (status, "Lock server mutex"); 
21 
22 /* 
23 * Wait for data 
24 */ ^ 
25 while (tty_server.first == NULL) { 
26 status = pthread_cond_wait ( 
27 &tty_server.request, &tty_server.mutex); 
28 if (status != 0) 
29 err_abort (status, "Wait for request"); 
30 } 
31 request = tty_server.first; 
32 tty_server.first = request->next; 
33 if (tty_server.first == NULL) 
34 tty_server.last = NULL; 
35 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (&tty_server.mutex); 
36 if (status != 0) 
37 err_abort (status, "Unlock server mutex"); 
38 
39 /* 
40 * Process the data 
41 */ 
124 
CHAPTER 4 A Jew ways to use threads 
42 
43 
44 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
51 
52 
53 
54 
55 
56 
57 
58 
59 
60 
61 
62 
63 
64 
65 
66 
67 
68 
69 
70 
71 
72 
73 
74 
75 
76 
77 
78 
79 
80 
81 
82 
83 
84 
operation = request->operation; 
switch (operation) { 
case REQ_QUIT: 
break; 
case REQ_READ: 
if (strlen (request->prompt) > 0) 
printf (request->prompt); 
if (fgets (request->text, 128, stdin) == NULL) 
request->text[0] = 'NO'; 
/* 
* Because fgets returns the newline, and we don't 
* want it, we look for it, and turn it into a null 
* (truncating the input) if found. It should be the 
* last character, if it is there. 
*/ 
len = strlen (request->text); 
if (len > 0 && request->text[len-l] == 'Nn1) 
request->text[len-1] = 'NO'; 
break; 
case REQ_WRITE: 
puts (request->text); 
break; 
default: 
break; 
if (request->synchronous) { 
status = pthread_mutex_lock (&tty_server.mutex); 
if (status != 0) 
err_abort (status, "Lock server mutex"); 
request->done_flag = 1; 
status = pthread_cond_signal (&request->done); 
if (status != 0) 
err_abort (status, "Signal server condition"); 
status = pthread_mutex_unlock (&tty_server.mutex); 
if (status != 0) 
err_abort (status, "Unlock server mutex"); 
} else 
free (request); 
if (operation == REQ_QUIT) 
break; 
return NULL; 
server.c part 2 tty server routine 
Part 3 shows the function that is called to initiate a request to the tty server 
thread. The caller specifies the desired operation (req_QUIT, req_read, or REQ_ 
write}, whether the operation is synchronous or not (sync), an optional prompt 
Client/Server 125 
string (prompt) for req_read operations, and the pointer to a string (input for 
req_write, or a buffer to return the result of an req_read operation). 
16-40 If a tty server thread is not already running, start one. A temporary thread 
attributes object (detached_attr) is created, and the detachstate attribute is set 
to pthread_create_detached. Thread attributes will be explained later in Section 
5.2.3. In this case, we are just saying that we will not need to use the thread iden- 
tifier after creation. 
45-76 Allocate and initialize a server request (reguest_t) packet. If the request is 
synchronous, initialize the condition variable (done) in the request packet！other- 
wise the condition variable isn't used. The new request is linked onto the request 
queue. 
81-83 Wake the server thread to handle the queued request. 
38-105 If the request is synchronous, wait for the server to set done_f lag and signal 
the done condition variable. If the operation is REQ_READ, copy the result string 
into the output buffer. Finally, destroy the condition variable, and free the 
request packet. 
| server.c part 3 tty_server_request 
1 /* 
2 * Request an operation 
3 */ 
4 void tty_server_request ( 
5 int operation, 
6 int sync, 
7 const char *prompt, 
8 char *string) 
9 { 
10 request_t *request; 
11 int status; 
12 
13 status = pthread_mutex_lock (&tty_server.mutex); 
14 if (status != 0) 
15 err_abort (status, "Lock server mutex"); 
16 if (!tty_server.running) { 
17 pthread_t thread; 
18 pthread_attr_t detached_attr; 
19 
20 status = pthread_attr_init (&detached_attr); 
21 if (status != 0) 
22 err_abort (status, "Init attributes object"); 
23 status = pthread_attr_setdetachstate ( 
24 &detached_attr, PTHREAD_CREATE_DETACHED); 
25 if (status != 0) 
26 err_abort (status, "Set detach state"); 
27 tty_server.running = 1; 
28 status = pthread_create (Scthread, &detached_attr, 
29 tty_server_routine, NULL); 
126 CHAPTER 4 A few ways to use threads 
30 if (status != 0) 
31 err_abort (status, "Create server"); 
32 
33 /* 
34 * Ignore an error in destroying the attributes object. 
35 * It's unlikely to fail, there's nothing useful we can 
36 * do about it, and it's not worth aborting the program 
37 * over it. 
38 */ 
39 pthread_attr_destroy (&detached_attr); 
40 } 
41 
42 /* 
43 * Create and initialize a request structure. 
44 */ 
45 request = (request_t*)malloc (sizeof (request_t)); 
46 if (request == NULL) 
47 errno_abort ("Allocate request"); 
48 request->next = NULL; 
49 request->operation = operation; 
50 request->synchronous = sync; 
51 if (sync) { 
52 request->done_flag = 0; 
53 status = pthread_cond_init (&request->done, NULL); 
54 if (status != 0) 
55 err_abort (status, "Init request condition"); 
56 } 
57 if (prompt != NULL) 
58 strncpy (request->prompt, prompt, 32); 
59 else 
60 request->prompt[0] = '\0'; 
61 if (operation == REQ_WRITE && string != NULL) 
62 strncpy (request->text, string, 128); 
63 else 
64 request->text[0] = '\0'; 
65 
66 /* 
67 * Add the request to the queue, maintaining the first and 
68 * last pointers. 
69 */ 
70 if (tty_server.first == NULL) { 
71 tty_server.first = request; 
72 tty_server.last = request; 
73 } else { 
74 (tty_server.last)->next = request; 
75 tty_server.last = request; 
76 } 
77 
78 /* 
Client/Server 127 
79 * Tell the server that a request is available. 
80 */ 
81 status = pthread_cond_signal (&tty_server.request); 
82 if (status != 0) 
83 err_abort (status, "Wake server"); 
84 
85 /* 
86 * If the request was "synchronous", then wait for a reply. 
87 */ 
88 if (sync) { 
89 while (!request->done_flag) { 
90 status = pthread_cond_wait ( 
91 &request->done, &tty_server.mutex); 
92 if (status != 0) 
93 err_abort (status, "Wait for sync request"); 
94 } 
95 if (operation == REQ_READ) { 
96 if (strlen (request->text) > 0) 
97 strcpy (string, request->text); 
98 else 
99 string[0] = '\0' ; 
100 } 
101 status = pthread_cond_destroy (&request->done); 
102 if (status != 0) 
103 err_abort (status, "Destroy request condition"); 
104 free (request); 
105 } 
106 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (&tty_server.mutex); 
107 if (status != 0) 
108 err_abort (status, "Unlock mutex"); 
109 } 
| server.c part 3 tty_server_request 
Part 4 shows the thread start function for the client threads, which repeatedly 
queue tty operation requests to the server. 
12-22 Read a line through the tty server. If the resulting string is empty, break out of 
the loop and terminate. Otherwise, loop four times printing the result string, at 
one-second intervals. Why four? It just "mixes things up" a little. 
26-31 Decrease the count of client threads, and wake the main thread if this is the 
last client thread to terminate. 
| server.c part 4 client_routine 
1 /* 
2 * Client routine ！ multiple copies will request server. 
3 */ 
4 void *client_routine (void *arg) 
128 CHAPTER 4 A few ways to use threads 
5 { 
 int my_number = (int)arg, loops; 
7 char prompt[32]; 
8 char string[128], formatted[128]; 
9 int status; 
10 
11 sprintf (prompt, "Client %d> ", my_number); 
12 while A) { 
13 tty_server_request (REQ_READ, 1, prompt, string); 
14 if (strlen (string) == 0) 
15 break; 
16 for (loops = 0; loops < 4; loops++) { 
17 sprintf ( 
18 formatted, "(%d#%d) %s", my_number, loops, string); 
19 tty_server_request (REQ_WRITE, 0, NULL, formatted); 
20 sleep A); 
21 } 
22 } 
23 status = pthread_mutex_lock (&client_mutex); 
24 if (status != 0) 
25 err_abort (status, "Lock client mutex"); 
26 client_threads！; 
27 if (client_threads <= 0) { 
28 status = pthread_cond_signal (&clients_done); 
29 if (status != 0) 
30 err_abort (status, "Signal clients done"); 
31 } 
32 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (&client_mutex); 
33 if (status != 0) ~ 
34 err_abort (status, "Unlock client mutex"); 
35 return NULL; 
36 } 
| server.c part 4 client_routine 
Part 5 shows the main program for server, c. It creates a set of client threads 
to utilize the tty server, and waits for them. 
7-15 On a Solaris system, set the concurrency level to the number of client threads 
by calling thr_setconcurrency. Because all the client threads will spend some of 
their time blocked on condition variables, we don't really need to increase the 
concurrency level for this program！however, it will provide less predictable exe- 
cution behavior. 
20-26 Create the client threads. 
27-35 This construct is much like pthread_join, except that it completes only when 
all of the client threads have terminated. As I have said elsewhere, pthread_join 
is nothing magical, and there is no reason to use it to detect thread termination 
unless it does exactly what you want. Joining multiple threads in a loop with 
pthread_join is rarely exactly what you want, and a "multiple join" like that 
shown here is easy to construct. 
Client/Server 129 
| server.c part 5 main 
1 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
2 { 
3 pthread_t thread; 
4 int count; 
5 int status; 
6 
7 #ifdef sun 
8 /* 
9 * On Solaris 2.5, threads are not timesliced. To ensure 
10 * that our threads can run concurrently, we need to 
11 * increase the concurrency level to CLIENT_THREADS. 
12 */ 
13 DPRINTF (("Setting concurrency level to %d\n", CLIENTJTHREADS)); 
14 thr_setconcurrency (CLIENTJTHREADS); 
15 #endif 
16 
17 /* 
18 * Create CLIENTJTHREADS clients. 
19 */ 
20 client_threads = CLIENT_THREADS; 
21 for (count = 0; count < client_threads; count++) { 
22 status = pthread_create (Sthread, NULL, 
23 client_routine, (void*(count); 
24 if (status != 0) 
25 err_abort (status, "Create client thread"); 
26 } 
27 status = pthread_mutex_lock (&client_mutex); 
28 if (status != 0) 
29 err_abort (status, "Lock client mutex"); 
30 while (client_threads > 0) { 
31 status = pthread_cond_wait (&clients_done, &client_mutex); 
32 if (status != 0) 
33 err_abort (status, "Wait for clients to finish"); 
34 } 
35 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (&client_mutex); 
36 if (status != 0) 
37 err_abort (status, "Unlock client mutex"); 
38 printf ("All clients done\n"); 
39 tty_server_request (REQ_QUIT, 1, NULL, NULL); 
40 return 0; 
41 } 
| server.c part 5 main 
5 Advanced threaded programming 
"Take some more tea," the March Hare said to Alice, very earnestly. 
"I've had nothing yet," Alice replied in an offended tone: 
"so I ca'n't take more." 
"You mean you ca'n't take less,"said the Hatter: 
"it's very easy to take more than nothing." 
！Lewis Carroll, Alice's Adventures in Wonderland 
The Pthreads standard provides many capabilities that aren't needed by many 
programs. To keep the sections dealing with synchronization and threads rela- 
tively simple, the more advanced capabilities are collected into this additional 
section. 
Section 5.1 describes a facility to manage initialization of data, particularly 
within a library, in a multithreaded environment. 
Section 5.2 describes "attributes objects," a way to control various character- 
istics of your threads, mutexes, and condition variables when you create them. 
Section 5.3 describes cancellation, a way to ask your threads to "go away" 
when you don't need them to continue. 
Section 5.4 describes thread-specific data, a sort of database mechanism that 
allows a library to associate data with individual threads that it encounters and 
to retrieve that data later. 
Section 5.5 describes the Pthreads facilities for realtime scheduling, to help 
your program interact with the cold, cruel world in a predictable way. 
5.1 One-time initialization 
'"Tis the voice of the Jubjub!" he suddenly cried. 
(This man, that they used to call "Dunce.") 
"As the Bellman would tell you," he added with pride, 
"I have uttered that sentiment once." 
！Lewis Carroll, The Hunting of the Snark 
pthread_once_t once_control = PTHREAD_ONCE_INIT; 
int pthread_once (pthread_once_t *once_control, 
void (*init_routine) (void)); 
131 
132 CHAPTER 5 Advanced threaded programming 
Some things need to be done once and only once, no matter what. When you 
are Initializing an application, it is often easiest to do all that from main, before 
calling anything else that might depend on the initialization！and, in particular, 
before creating any threads that might depend on having initialized mutexes, cre- 
ated thread-specific data keys, and so forth. 
If you are writing a library, you usually don't have that luxury. But you must 
still be sure that the necessary initialization has been completed before you can 
use anything that needs to be initialized. Statically initialized mutexes can help a 
lot, but sometimes you may find this "one-time initialization" feature more 
convenient. 
In traditional sequential programming, one-time initialization is often man- 
aged by a boolean variable. A control variable is statically initialized to 0, and any 
code that depends on the initialization can test the variable. If the value is still 0 
it can perform the initialization and then set the variable to 1. Later checks will 
skip the initialization. 
When you are using multiple threads, it is not that easy. If more than one 
thread executes the initialization sequence concurrently, two threads may both 
find initializer to be 0, and both perform the initialization, which, presumably, 
should have been performed only once. The state of initialization is a shared 
invariant that must be protected by a mutex. 
You can code your own one-time initialization using a boolean variable and a 
statically initialized mutex. In many cases this will be more convenient than 
pthread_once, and it will always be more efficient. The main reason for pthread_ 
once is that you were not originally allowed to statically initialize a mutex. Thus, 
to use a mutex, you had to first call pthread_mutex_init. You must initialize a 
mutex only once, so the initialization call must be made in one-time initialization 
code. The pthread_once function solved this recursive problem. When static ini- 
tialization of mutexes was added to the standard, pthread_once was retained as 
a convenience function. If it's convenient, use it, but remember that you don't 
have to use it. 
First, you declare a control variable of type pthread_once_t. The control vari- 
able must be statically initialized using the PTHREAD_ONCE_init macro, as shown 
in the following program, called once.c. You must also create a function contain- 
ing the code to perform all initialization that is to be associated with the control 
variable. Now, at any time, a thread may call pthread_once, specifying a pointer 
to the control variable and a pointer to the associated initialization function. 
The pthread_once function first checks the control variable to determine 
whether the initialization has already completed. If so, pthread_once simply 
returns. If initialization has not yet been started, pthread_once calls the initiali- 
zation function (with no arguments), and then records that initialization has been 
completed. If a thread calls pthread_once while initialization is in progress in 
another thread, the calling thread will wait until that other thread completes ini- 
tialization, and then return. In other words, when any call to pthread_once 
returns successfully, the caller can be certain that all states initialized by the 
associated initialization function are ready to go. 
One-time initialization 133 
13-20 The function once_init_routine initializes the mutex when called！the use of 
pthread_once ensures that it will be called exactly one time. 
29 The thread function thread_routine calls pthread_once before using mutex, 
to ensure that it exists even if it had not already been created by main. 
51 The main program also calls pthread_once before using mutex, so that the 
program will execute correctly regardless of when thread_routine runs. Notice 
that, while I normally stress that all shared data must be initialized before creat- 
ing any thread that uses it, in this case, the only critical shared data is really the 
once_block！it is irrelevant that the mutex is not initialized, because the use of 
pthread_once ensures proper synchronization. 
| once.c 
1 #include <pthread.h> 
2 #include "errors.h" 
3 
4 pthread_once_t once_block = PTHREAD_ONCE_INIT; 
5 pthread_mutex_t mutex; 
6 
7 /* 
8 * This is the one-time initialization routine. It will be 
9 * called exactly once, no matter how many calls to pthread_once 
10 * with the same control structure are made during the course of 
11 * the program. 
12 */ 
13 void once_init_routine (void) 
14 { 
15 int status; 
16 
17 status = pthread_mutex_init (Smutex, NULL); 
18 if (status != 0) 
19 err_abort (status, "Init Mutex"); 
20 } 
21 
22 /* 
23 * Thread start routine that calls pthread_once. 
24 */ 
25 void *thread_routine (void *arg) 
26 { 
27 int status; 
28 
29 status = pthread_once (&once_block, once_init_routine); 
30 if (status != 0) 
31 err_abort (status, "Once init"); 
32 status = pthread_mutex_lock (Smutex); 
33 if (status != 0) 
34 err_abort (status, "Lock mutex"); 
35 printf ("thread_routine has locked the mutex.\n"); 
134 CHAPTER 5 Advanced threaded programming 
36 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (Smutex); 
37 if (status != 0) 
38 err_abort (status, "Unlock mutex"); 
39 return NULL; 
40 } 
41 
42 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
43 { 
44 pthread_t thread_id; 
45 char *input, buffer[64]; 
46 int status; 
47 
48 status = pthread_create (&thread_id, NULL, thread_routine, NULL); 
49 if (status != 0) 
50 err_abort (status, "Create thread"); 
51 status = pthread_once (&once_block, once_init_routine); 
52 if (status != 0) 
53 err_abort (status, "Once init"); 
54 status = pthread_mutex_lock (Smutex); 
55 if (status != 0) 
56 err_abort (status, "Lock mutex"); 
57 printf ("Main has locked the mutex.\n"); 
58 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (Smutex); 
59 if (status != 0) 
60 err_abort (status, "Unlock mutex"); 
61 status = pthread_join (thread_id, NULL); 
62 if (status != 0) 
63 err_abort (status, "Join thread"); 
64 return 0; 
65 } 
5.2 Attributes objects 
The fifth is ambition. It next will be right 
To describe each particular batch: 
Distinguishing those that have feathers, and bite, 
From those that have whiskers, and scratch. 
！Lewis Carroll, The Hunting of the Snark 
So far, when we created threads, or dynamically initialized mutexes and con- 
dition variables, we have usually used the pointer value NULL as the second 
argument. That argument is actually a pointer to an attributes object. The value 
Attributes objects 135 
NULL indicates that Pthreads should assume the default value for all attributes！ 
just as it does when statically initializing a mutex or condition variable. 
An attributes object is an extended argument list provided when you initialize 
an object. It allows the main interfaces (for example, pthread_create) to be rela- 
tively simple, while allowing "expert" capability when you need it. Later POSIX 
standards will be able to add options without requiring source changes to existing 
code. In addition to standard attributes provided by Pthreads, an implementation 
can provide specialized options without creating nonstandard parameters. 
You can think of an attributes object as a private structure. You read or write 
the "members" of the structure by calling special functions, rather than by 
accessing public member names. For example, you read the stacksize attribute 
from a thread attributes object by calling pthread_attr_getstacksize, or write 
it by calling pthread_attr_setstacksize. 
In a simple implementation of Pthreads the type pthread_attr_t might be a 
typedef struct and the get and set functions might be macros to read or write 
members of the variable. Another implementation might allocate memory when 
you initialize an attributes object, and it may implement the get and set opera- 
tions as real functions that perform validity checking. 
Threads, mutexes, and condition variables each have their own special 
attributes object type. Respectively, the types are pthread_attr_t, pthread_ 
mutexattr_t, and pthread_condattr_t. 
5.2.1 Mutex attributes 
pthread_mutexattr_t attr; 
int pthread_mutexattr_init (pthread_mutexattr_t *attr); 
int pthread_mutexattr_destroy ( 
pthread_mutexattr_t *attr); 
#ifdef _POSIX_THREAD_PROCESS_SHARED 
int pthread_mutexattr_getpshared ( 
pthread_mutexattr_t *attr, int *pshared); 
int pthread_mutexattr_setpshared ( 
pthread_mutexattr_t *attr, int pshared); 
iendif 
Pthreads defines the following attributes for mutex creation: pshared, protocol, 
and prioceiltng. No system is required to implement any of these attributes, how- 
ever, so check the system documentation before using them. 
You initialize a mutex attributes object by calling pthread_mutexattr_init, 
specifying a pointer to a variable of type pthread_mutexattr_t, as in mutex_ 
attr.c, shown next. You use that attributes object by passing its address to 
pthread_mutex_init instead of the NULL value we've been using so far. 
136 CHAPTER 5 Advanced threaded programming 
If your system provides the _posix_thread_process_shared option, then it 
supports the pshared attribute, which you can set by calling the function 
pthread_mutexattr_setpshared. If you set the pshared attribute to the value 
PTHREAD_PROCESS_SHARED, you can use the mutex to synchronize threads within 
separate processes that have access to the memory where the mutex (pthread_ 
mutex_t) is initialized. The default value for this attribute is pthread_process_ 
PRIVATE. 
The mutex_attr. c program shows how to set a mutex attributes object to cre- 
ate a mutex using the pshared attribute. This example uses the default value. 
pthread_process_private, to avoid the additional complexity of creating shared 
memory and forking a process. The other mutex attributes, protocol and prioceil- 
ing, will be discussed later in Section 5.5.5. 
| mutex_attr.c 
1 #include <pthread.h> 
2 linclude "errors.h" 
3 
4 pthread_mutex_t mutex; 
5 
6 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
7 { 
8 pthread_mutexattr_t mutex_attr; 
9 int status; 
10 
11 status = pthread_mutexattr_init (&mutex_attr); 
12 if (status != 0) 
13 err_abort (status, "Create attr"); 
14 tifdef _POSIX_THREAD_PROCESS_SHARED 
15 status = pthread_mutexattr_setpshared ( 
16 &mutex_attr, PTHREAD_PROCESS_PRIVATE); 
17 if (status != 0) 
18 err_abort (status, "Set pshared"); 
19 #endif 
20 status = pthread_mutex_init (Smutex, &mutex_attr); 
21 if (status != 0) 
22 err_abort (status, "Init mutex"); 
23 return 0; 
24 } 
| mutex attr.c 
Attributes objects 137 
5.2.2 Condition variable attributes 
pthread_condattr_t attr; 
int pthread_condattr_init (pthread_condattr_t *attr); 
int pthread_condattr_destroy ( 
pthread_condattr_t *attr); 
#ifdef _POSIX_THREAD_PROCESS_SHARED 
int pthread_condattr_getpshared ( 
pthread_condattr_t *attr, int *pshared); 
int pthread_condattr_setpshared ( 
pthread_condattr_t *attr, int pshared); 
#endif 
Pthreads defines only one attribute for condition variable creation, pshared. 
No system is required to implement this attribute, so check the system documen- 
tation before using it. You initialize a condition variable attributes object using 
pthread_condattr_init, specifying a pointer to a variable of type pthread_ 
condattr_t, as in cond_attr.c, shown next. You use that attributes object by 
passing its address to pthread_cond_init instead of the null value we've been 
using so far. 
If your system defines _posix_thread_process_shared then it supports the 
pshared attribute. You set the pshared attribute by calling the function pthread_ 
condattr_setpshared. If you set the pshared attribute to the value PTHREAD_ 
process_shared, the condition variable can be used by threads in separate 
processes that have access to the memory where the condition variable (pthread_ 
cond_t) is initialized. The default value for this attribute is pthread_process_ 
PRIVATE. 
The cond_attr.c program shows how to set a condition variable attributes 
object to create a condition variable using the pshared attribute. This example 
uses the default value, pthread_process_private, to avoid the additional com- 
plexity of creating shared memory and forking a process. 
| cond_attr. c 
1 #include <pthread.h> 
2 #include "errors.h" 
3 
4 pthread_cond_t cond; 
5 
6 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
7 { 
8 pthread_condattr_t cond_attr; 
9 int status; 
10 
138 
CHAPTER 5 Advanced threaded programming 
11 status = pthread_condattr_init (&cond_attr); 
12 if (status != 0) 
13 err_abort (status, "Create attr"); 
14 lifdef _POSIX_THREAD_PROCESS_SHARED 
15 status = pthread_condattr_setpshared ( 
16 &cond_attr, PTHREAD_PROCESS_PRIVATE); 
17 if (status != 0) 
18 err_abort (status, "Set pshared"); 
19 #endif 
20 status = pthread_cond_init (Scond, &cond_attr); 
21 if (status != 0) 
22 err_abort (status, "Init cond"); 
23 return 0; 
24 } 
| cond_attr.c 
To make use of a pthread_process_shared condition variable, you must also 
use a pthread_PROCESS_shared mutex. That's because two threads that synchro- 
nize using a condition variable must also use the same mutex. Waiting for a 
condition variable automatically unlocks, and then locks, the associated mutex. 
So if the mutex isn't also created with pthread_process_SHARED, the synchroni- 
zation won't work. 
5.2.3 Thread attributes 
pthread_attr_t attr; 
int pthread_attr_init (pthread_attr_t *attr); 
int pthread_attr_destroy (pthread_attr_t *attr); 
int pthread_attr_getdetachstate ( 
pthread_attr_t *attr, int *detachstate); 
int pthread_attr_setdetachstate ( 
pthread_attr_t *attr, int detachstate); 
#ifdef _POSIX_THREAD_ATTR_STACKSIZE 
int pthread_attr_getstacksize ( 
pthread_attr_t *attr, size_t *stacksize); 
int pthread_attr_setstacksize ( 
pthread_attr_t *attr, size_t stacksize); 
#endif 
#ifdef _POSIX_THREAD_ATTR_STACKADDR 
int pthread_attr_getstackaddr ( 
pthread_attr_t *attr, void *stackaddr); 
int pthread_attr_setstackaddr ( 
pthread_attr_t *attr, void **stackaddr); 
#endif 
Attributes objects 139 
POSIX defines the following attributes for thread creation: detachstate, stack- 
size, stackaddr, scope, inheritsched, schedpolicy, and schedparam. Some systems 
won't support all of these attributes, so you need to check the system documen- 
tation before using them. You initialize a thread attributes object using pthread_ 
attr_init, specifying a pointer to a variable of type pthread_attr_t, as in the 
program thread_attr.c, shown later. You use the attributes object you've cre- 
ated by passing its address as the second argument to pthread_create instead of 
the null value we've been using so far. 
All Pthreads systems support the detachstate attribute. The value of this 
attribute can be either pthread_create_joinable or pthread_create_detached. 
By default, threads are created joinable, which means that the thread identifica- 
tion created by pthread_create can be used to join with the thread and retrieve 
its return value, or to cancel it. If you set the detachstate attribute to pthread_ 
create_detached, the identification of threads created using that attributes 
object can't be used. It also means that when the thread terminates, any 
resources it used can immediately be reclaimed by the system. 
When you create threads that you know you won't need to cancel, or join with, 
you should create them detached. Remember that, in many cases, even if you want 
to know when a thread terminates, or receive some return value from it, you may 
not need to use pthread_join. If you provide your own notification mechanism, 
for example, using a condition variable, you can still create your threads detached. 
I Setting the size of a stack is not very portable. 
If your system defines the symbol _posix_thread_attr_Stacksize, then you 
can set the stacksize attribute to specify the minimum size for the stack of a 
thread created using the attributes object. Most systems will support this option, 
but you should use it with caution because stack size isn't portable. The amount 
of stack space you'll need depends on the calling standards and data formats 
used by each system. 
Pthreads defines the symbol pthread_stack_min as the minimum stack size 
required for a thread: If you really need to specify a stack size, you might be best 
off calculating your requirements in terms of the minimum required by the imple- 
mentation. Or, you could base your requirements on the default stacksize 
attribute selected by the implementation！for example, twice the default, or half 
the default. The program thread_attr. c shows how to read the default stacksize 
attribute value of an initialized attribute by calling pthread_attr_getstacksize. 
I Setting the address of a stack is less portable! 
If your system defines the symbol _posix_thread_attr_stackaddr, then you 
can set the stackaddr attribute to specify a region of memory to be used as a 
stack by any thread created using this attributes object. The stack must be at 
least as large as pthread_stack_min. You may need to specify an area of memory 
with an address that's aligned to some required granularity. On a machine where 
the stack grows downward from higher addresses to lower addresses, the address 
140 CHAPTER 5 Advanced threaded programming 
you specify should be the highest address in the stack, not the lowest. If the stack 
grows up, you need to specify the lowest address. 
You also need to be aware of whether the machine increments (or decrements) 
the stack before or after writing a new value！this determines whether the 
address you specify should be "inside" or "outside" the stack you've allocated. The 
system can't tell whether you allocated enough space, or specified the right 
address, so it has to trust you. If you get it wrong, undesirable things will occur. 
Use the stackaddr attribute only with great caution, and beware that it may 
well be the least portable aspect of Pthreads. While a reasonable value for the 
stacksize attribute will probably work on a wide range of machines, it is little 
more than a wild coincidence if any particular value of the stackaddr attribute 
works on any two machines. Also, you must remember that you can create only 
one thread with any value of the stackaddr attribute. If you create two concurrent 
threads with the same stackaddr attribute value, the threads will run on the 
same stack. (That would be bad.) 
The thread_attr.c program that follows shows some of these attributes in 
action, with proper conditionalization to avoid using the stacksize attribute if it is 
not supported by your system. If stacksize is supported (and it will be on most 
UNIX systems), the program will print the default and minimum stack size, and 
set stacksize to a value twice the minimum. The code also creates the thread 
detached, which means no thread can join with it to determine when it com- 
pletes. Instead, main exits by calling pthread_exit, which means that the 
process will terminate when the last thread exits. 
This example does not include the priority scheduling attributes, which are 
discussed (and demonstrated) in Section 5.5.2. It also does not demonstrate use 
of the stackaddr attribute！as I said, there is no way to use stackaddr in any 
remotely portable way and, although I have mentioned it for completeness, I 
strongly discourage use of stackaddr in any program. 
| thread_attr.c 
1 #include <limits.h> 
2 #include <pthread.h> 
3 #include "errors.h" 
4 
5 /* 
6 * Thread start routine that reports it ran, and then exits. 
7 */ 
8 void *thread_routine (void *arg) 
9 { 
10 printf ("The thread is here\n"); 
11 return NULL; 
12 } 
13 
14 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
Attributes objects 141 
15 { 
16 pthread_t thread_id; 
17 pthread_attr_t thread_attr; 
18 struct sched_param thread_param; 
19 size_t stack_size; 
20 int status; 
21 
22 status = pthread_attr_init (&thread_attr); 
23 if (status != 0) 
24 err_abort (status, "Create attr"); 
25 
26 /* 
27 * Create a detached thread. 
28 */ 
29 status = pthread_attr_setdetachstate ( 
30 &thread_attr, PTHREAD_CREATE_DETACHED); 
31 if (status != 0) 
32 err_abort (status, "Set detach"); 
33 #ifdef _POSIX_THREAD_ATTR_STACKSIZE 
34 /* 
35 * If supported, determine the default stack size and report 
36 * it, and then select a stack size for the new thread. 
37 * 
38 * Note that the standard does not specify the default stack 
39 * size, and the default value in an attributes object need 
40 * not be the size that will actually be used. Solaris 2.5 
41 * uses a value of 0 to indicate the default. 
42 */ 
43 status = pthread_attr_getstacksize (&thread_attr, &stack_size); 
44 if (status != 0) 
45 err_abort (status, "Get stack size"); 
46 printf ("Default stack size is %u; minimum is %u\n", 
47 stack_size, PTHREAD_STACK_MIN); 
48 status = pthread_attr_setstacksize ( 
49 &thread_attr, PTHREAD_STACK_MIN*2); 
50 if (status != 0) 
51 err_abort (status, "Set stack size"); 
52 #endif 
53 status = pthread_create ( 
54 &thread_id, &thread_attr, thread_routine, NULL); 
55 if (status != 0) 
56 err_abort (status, "Create thread"); 
57 printf ("Main exiting\n"); 
58 pthread_exit (NULL); 
59 return 0; 
60 } 
| thread attr.c 
142 
CHAPTER 5 Advanced threaded programming 
5.3 Cancellation 
"Now, I give you fair warning," 
shouted fhe Queen, stamping on the ground as she spoke; 
"either you or your head must be off, 
and that in about half no time! Take your choice!" 
The Duchess took her choice, and was gone in a moment. 
！Lewis Carroll, Alice's Adventures in Wonderland 
int pthread_cancel (pthread_t thread); 
int pthread_setcancelstate (int state, int *oldstate); 
int pthread_setcanceltype (int type, int *oldtype); 
void pthread_testcancel (void); 
void pthread_cleanup_push ( 
void (*routine)(void *), void *arg); 
void pthread_cleanup_pop (int execute); 
Most of the time each thread runs independently, finishes a specific job, and 
exits on its own. But sometimes a thread is created to do something that doesn't 
necessarily need to be finished. The user might press a CANCEL button to stop a 
long search operation. Or the thread might be part of a redundant algorithm and 
is no longer useful because some other thread succeeded. What do you do when 
you just want a thread to go away? That's what the Pthreads cancellation inter- 
faces are for. 
Cancelling a thread is a lot like telling a human to stop something they're 
doing. Say that one of the bailing programmers has become maniacally obsessed 
with reaching land, and refuses to stop rowing until reaching safety (Figure 5.1). 
When the boat finally runs up onto the beach, he's become so fixated that he fails 
to realize he's done. The other programmers must roughly shake him, and forcibly 
remove the oars from his blistered hands to stop him！but clearly he must be 
stopped. That's cancellation. Sort of. I can think of other analogies for cancellation 
within the bailing programmer story, but I choose to ignore them. Perhaps you 
can, too. 
Cancellation allows you to tell a thread to shut itself down. You don't need it 
often, but it can sometimes be extremely useful. Cancellation isn't an arbitrary 
external termination. It is more like a polite (though not necessarily "friendly") 
request. You're most likely to want to cancel a thread when you've found that 
something you set it off to accomplish is no longer necessary. You should never 
use cancellation unless you really want the target thread to go away. It is a termi- 
nation mechanism, not a communication channel. So, why would you want to do 
that to a thread that you presumably created for some reason? 
An application might use threads to perform long-running operations, per- 
haps in the background, while the user continues working. Such operations 
Cancellation 143 
; ,,(* 
J ' ' -V- 
| ^\ ? V 
fa 
\ 
|*| | 
'"* 
}. / 
x 
V: '^ - 
//], ,' 
/' ) *^"~~ 
V- 
?/<&* 
/ 
/ 
- .v 
！ 
FIGURE 5.1 Thread cancellation analogy 
might include saving a large document, preparing to print a document, or sorting 
a large list. Most such interfaces probably will need to have some way for the user 
to cancel an operation, whether it is pressing the ESC key or Ctrl-C, or clicking a 
stop sign icon on the screen. The thread receiving the user interface cancel 
request would then determine that one or more background operations were in 
progress, and use pthread_cancel to cancel the appropriate threads. 
Often, threads are deployed to "explore" a data set in parallel for some heuris- 
tic solution. For example, solving an equation for a local minimum or maximum. 
Once you've gotten one answer that's good enough, the remaining threads may 
no longer be needed. If so, you can cancel them to avoid wasting processor time 
and get on to other work. 
Pthreads allows each thread to control its own termination. It can restore pro- 
gram invariants and unlock mutexes. It can even defer cancellation while it 
completes some important operation. For example, when two write operations 
must both complete if either completes, a cancellation between the two is not 
acceptable. 
Pthreads supports three cancellation modes, described in Table 5.1, which 
are encoded as two binarv values called "cancellation state" and "cancellation 
144 
CHAPTER 5 Advanced threaded programming 
Mode State Type Meaning 
Off 
Deferred 
Asynchronous 
disabled 
enabled 
enabled 
may be either 
deferred 
asynchronous 
Cancellation remains pending 
until enabled. 
Cancellation occurs at next 
cancellation point. 
Cancellation may be processed at 
any time. 
TABLE 5.1 Cancellation states 
type." Each essentially can be on or off. (While that technically gives four modes, 
one of them is redundant.) As shown in the table, cancellation state is said to be 
enabled or disabled, and cancellation type is said to be deferred or asynchronous. 
By default, cancellation is deferred, and can occur only at specific points in 
the program that check whether the thread has been requested to terminate, 
called cancellation points. Most functions that can wait for an unbounded time 
should be deferred cancellation points. Deferred cancellation points include wait- 
ing on a condition variable, reading or writing a file, and other functions where 
the thread may be blocked for a substantial period of time. There is also a special 
function called pthread_testcancel that is nothing but a deferred cancellation 
point. It will return immediately if the thread hasn't been asked to terminate, 
which allows you to turn any of your functions into cancellation points. 
Some systems provide a function to terminate a thread immediately. Although 
that sounds useful, it is difficult to use such a function safely. In fact, it is nearly 
impossible in a normal modular programming environment. If a thread is termi- 
nated with a mutex locked, for example, the next thread trying to lock that mutex 
will be stuck waiting forever. 
It might seem that the thread system could automatically release the mutex; 
but most of the time that's no help. Threads lock mutexes because they're modi- 
fying shared data. No other thread can know what data has been modified or 
what the thread was trying to change, which makes it difficult to fix the data. Now 
the program is broken. When the mutex is left locked, you can usually tell that 
something's broken because one or more threads will hang waiting for the mutex. 
The only way to recover from terminating a thread with a locked mutex is for 
the application to be able to analyze all shared data and repair it to achieve a con- 
sistent and correct state. That is not impossible, and it is worth substantial effort 
when an application must be fail-safe. However, it is generally not practical for 
anything but an embedded system where the application designers control every 
bit of shared state in the process. You would have to rebuild not only your own 
program or library state, but also the state affected by any library functions that 
might be called by the thread (for example, the ANSI C library). 
To cancel a thread, you need the thread's identifier, the pthread_t value 
returned to the creator by pthread_create or returned to the thread itself by 
pthread_self. Cancelling a thread is asynchronous！that is, when the call to 
Cancellation 145 
pthread_cancel returns, the thread has not necessarily been canceled, it may 
have only been notified that a cancel request is pending against it. If you need to 
know when the thread has actually terminated, you must join with it by calling 
pthread_join after cancelling it. 
If the thread had asynchronous cancelability type set, or when the thread next 
reaches a deferred cancellation point, the cancel request will be delivered by the 
system. When that happens, the system will set the thread's cancelability type to 
pthread_cancel_deferred and the cancelability state to pthread_cancel_disable. 
That is, the thread can clean up and terminate without having to worry about 
being canceled again. 
When a function that is a cancellation point detects a pending cancel request, 
the function does not return to the caller. The active cleanup handlers will be 
called, if there are any, and the thread will terminate. There is no way to "handle" 
cancellation and continue execution！the thread must either defer cancellation 
entirely or terminate. This is analogous to C++ object destructors, rather than 
C++ exceptions！the object is allowed to clean up after itself, but it is not allowed 
to avoid destruction. 
The following program, called cancel.c, shows how to write a thread that 
responds "reasonably quickly" to deferred cancellation, by calling pthread_ 
testcancel within a loop. 
11-19 The thread function thread_routine loops indefinitely, until canceled, testing 
periodically for a pending cancellation request. It minimizes the overhead of call- 
ing pthread_testcancel by doing so only every 1000 iterations (line 17). 
27-35 On a Solaris system, set the thread concurrency level to 2, by calling thr_ 
setconcurrency. Without the call to thr_setconcurrency, this program will 
hang on Solaris because thread_routine is "compute bound" and will not block. 
The main program would never have another chance to run once thread_routine 
started, and could not call pthread_cancel. 
36-54 The main program creates a thread running thread_routine, sleeps for two 
seconds, and then cancels the thread. It joins with the thread, and checks the 
return value, which should be pthread_canceled to indicate that it was can- 
celed, rather than terminated normally. 
| cancel.c 
1 #include <pthread.h> 
2 #include "errors.h" 
3 
4 static int counter; 
5 
6 /* 
7 * Loop until canceled. The thread can be canceled only 
8 * when it calls pthread_testcancel, which it does each 1000 
9 * iterations. 
10 */ 
146 CHAPTER 5 Advanced threaded programming 
11 void *thread_routine (void *arg) 
12 { 
13 DPRINTF (("thread_routine starting\n")); 
14 for (counter =0; ; counter++) 
15 if ((counter % 1000) == 0) { 
16 DPRINTF (("calling testcancel\n")); 
17 pthread_testcancel ( ); 
18 } 
19 } 
20 
21 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
22 { 
23 pthread_t thread_id; 
24 void *result; 
25 int status; 
26 
27 #ifdef sun 
28 /* 
29 * On Solaris 2.5, threads are not timesliced. To ensure 
30 * that our two threads can run concurrently, we need to 
31 * increase the concurrency level to 2. 
32 */ 
33 DPRINTF (("Setting concurrency level to 2\n")); 
34 thr_setconcurrency B); 
35 #endif 
36 status = pthread_create ( 
37 &thread_id, NULL, thread_routine, NULL); 
38 if (status != 0) 
39 err_abort (status, "Create thread"); 
40 sleep B); 
41 
42 DPRINTF (("calling cancelNn")); 
43 status = pthread_cancel (thread_id); 
44 if (status != 0) 
45 err_abort (status, "Cancel thread"); 
46 
47 DPRINTF (("calling join\n")); 
48 status = pthread_join (thread_id, Sresult); 
49 if (status != 0) 
50 err_abort (status, "Join thread"); 
51 if (result == PTHREAD_CANCELED) 
52 printf ("Thread canceled at iteration %d\n", counter); 
53 else 
54 printf ("Thread was not canceled\n"); 
55 return 0; 
56 } 
| cancel.c 
Cancellation 147 
A thread can disable cancellation around sections of code that need to com- 
plete without interruption, by calling pthread_setcancelstate. For example, if a 
database update operation takes two separate write calls, you wouldn't want to 
complete the first and have the second canceled. If you request that a thread be 
canceled while cancellation is disabled, the thread remembers that it was can- 
celed but won't do anything about it until after cancellation is enabled again. 
Because enabling cancellation isn't a cancellation point, you also need to test for a 
pending cancel request if you want a cancel processed immediately. 
When a thread may be canceled while it holds private resources, such as a 
locked mutex or heap storage that won't ever be freed by any other thread, those 
resources need to be released when the thread is canceled. If the thread has a 
mutex locked, it may also need to "repair" shared data to restore program invari- 
ants. Cleanup handlers provide the mechanism to accomplish the cleanup, 
somewhat like process atexit handlers. After acquiring a resource, and before 
any cancellation points, declare a cleanup handler by calling pthread_cleanup_ 
push. Before releasing the resource, but after any cancellation points, remove the 
cleanup handler by calling pthread_cleanup_pop. 
If you don't have a thread's identifier, you can't cancel the thread. That means 
that, at least using portable POSIX functions, you can't write an "idle thread 
killer" that will arbitrarily terminate threads in the process. You can only cancel 
threads that you created, or threads for which the creator (or the thread itself) 
gave you an identifier. That generally means that cancellation is restricted to 
operating within a subsystem. 
5.3.1 Deferred cancelability 
"Deferred cancelability" means that the thread's cancelability type has been set 
to pthread_cancel_deferred and the thread's cancelability enable has been set to 
pthread_cancel_enable. The thread will only respond to cancellation requests 
when it reaches one of a set of "cancellation points." 
The following functions are always cancellation points on any Pthreads 
system: 
pthread_cond_wait 
pthread_cond_timedwait 
pthread_join 
pthread_testcancel 
sigwait 
aio_suspend 
close 
creat 
fcntl (F_SETLCKW) _ 
The following list of functions may be cancellation points. You should write 
your code so that it will function correctly if any of these are cancellation points 
fsync 
mq receive 
mq send 
msync 
nanosleep 
open 
pause 
read 
sem wait 
sigwaitinfo 
sigsuspend 
sigtimedwait 
sleep 
system 
tcdrain 
wait 
waitpid 
write 
148 
CHAPTER 5 Advanced threaded programming 
and also so that it will not break if any of them are not. If you depend upon any 
particular behavior, you may limit the portability of your code. You'll have to look 
at the conformance documentation to find out which, if any, are cancellation 
points for the system you are using: 
closedir 
ctermid 
fclose 
fcntl (except F_SETLCKW) 
fflush 
fgetc 
fgets 
fopen 
fprintf 
fputc 
fputs 
fread 
getc_unlocked 
getchar 
getchar_unlocked 
getcwd 
getgrgid 
getgrgid_r 
getrtnam 
getgrnam_r 
getlogin 
getlogin_r 
getpwnam 
getpwnam r 
printf 
putc 
putc_unlocked 
putchar 
putchar_unlocked 
puts 
readdir 
remove 
rename 
rewind 
rewinddir 
scanf 
tmpfile 
tmpname 
ttyname 
ttyname_r 
ungetc 
freopen getpwuid 
fscanf getpwuid_r 
fseek gets 
ftell lseek 
fwrite opendir 
getc perror 
Pthreads specifies that any ANSI C or POSIX function not specified in one of 
the two lists cannot be a cancellation point. However, your system probably has 
many additional cancellation points. That's because few UNIX systems are 
"POSIX." That is, they support other programming interfaces as well！such as 
BSD 4.3, System V Release 4, UNIX95, and so forth. POSIX doesn't recognize the 
existence of functions such as select or poll, and therefore it can't say whether 
or not they are cancellation points. Yet clearly both are functions that may block 
for an arbitrary period of time, and programmers using them with cancellation 
would reasonably expect them to behave as cancellation points. X/Open is cur- 
rently addressing this problem for UNIX98 [X/Open System Interfaces, Issue 5). 
by extending the Pthreads list of cancellation points. 
Most cancellation points involve I/O operations that may block the thread for 
an "unbounded" time. They're cancelable so that the waits can be interrupted. 
When a thread reaches a cancellation point the system determines whether a 
cancel is pending for the current ("target") thread. A cancel will be pending if 
another thread has called pthread_cancel for the target thread since the last 
time the target thread returned from a cancellation point. If a cancel is pending, 
the system will immediately begin calling cleanup functions, and then the thread 
will terminate. 
If no cancel is currently pending, the function will proceed. If another thread 
requests that the thread be canceled while the thread is waiting for something 
(such as I/O) then the wait will be interrupted and the thread will begin its can- 
cellation cleanup. 
Cancellation 149 
If you need to ensure that cancellation can't occur at a particular cancellation 
point, or during some sequence of cancellation points, you can temporarily dis- 
able cancellation in that region of code. The following program, called cancel_ 
disable.c, is a variant of cancel.c. The "target" thread periodically calls sleep, 
and does not want the call to be cancelable. 
23-32 After each cycle of 755 iterations, thread_routine will call sleep to wait a 
second. (The value 755 is just an arbitrary number that popped into my head. Do 
arbitrary numbers ever pop into your head?) Prior to sleeping, thread_routine 
disables cancellation by setting the cancelability state to pthread_cancel_ 
disable. After sleep returns, it restores the saved cancelability state by calling 
pthread_setcancelstate again. 
33-35 Just as in cancel. c, test for a pending cancel every 1000 iterations. 
| cancel_disable.c 
1 #include <pthread.h> 
2 #include "errors.h" 
3 
4 static int counter; 
5 
6 /* 
7 * Thread start routine. 
8 */ 
9 void *thread_routine (void *arg) 
10 { 
11 int state; 
12 int status; 
13 
14 for (counter =0; ; counter++) { 
15 
16 /* 
17 * Each 755 iterations, disable cancellation and sleep 
18 * for one second. 
19 * 
20 * Each 1000 iterations, test for a pending cancel by 
21 * calling pthread_testcancel(). 
22 */ 
23 if ((counter % 755) == 0) { 
24 status = pthread_setcancelstate ( 
25 PTHREAD_CANCEL_DISABLE, {.State); 
26 if (status != 0) 
27 err_abort (status, "Disable cancel"); 
28 sleep A); 
29 status = pthread_setcancelstate ( 
30 state, Sstate); 
31 if (status != 0) 
32 err abort (status, "Restore cancel"); 
150 CHAPTER 5 Advanced threaded programming 
33 } else 
34 if ((counter % 1000) == 0) 
35 pthread_testcancel (); 
36 } 
37 } 
38 
39 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
40 { 
41 pthread_t thread_id; 
42 void *result; 
43 int status; 
44 
45 status = pthread_create ( 
46 &thread_id, NULL, thread_routine, NULL); 
47 if (status != 0) 
48 err_abort (status, "Create thread"); 
49 sleep B); 
50 status = pthread_cancel (thread_id); 
51 if (status != 0) 
52 err_abort (status, "Cancel thread"); 
53 
54 status = pthread_join (thread_id, Sresult); 
55 if (status != 0) 
56 err_abort (status, "Join thread"); 
57 if (result == PTHREAD_CANCELED) 
58 printf ("Thread canceled at iteration %d\n", counter); 
59 else 
60 printf ("Thread was not canceled\n"); 
61 return 0; 
62 } 
| cancel disable.c 
5.3.2 Asynchronous cancelability 
Asynchronous cancellation is useful because the "target thread" doesn't need 
to poll for cancellation requests by using cancellation points. That can be valu- 
able for a thread that runs a tight compute-bound loop (for example, searching 
for a prime number factor) where the overhead of calling pthread_testcancel 
might be severe. 
I Avoid asynchronous cancellation! 
It is difficult to use correctly and is rarely useful. 
The problem is that you're limited in what you can do with asynchronous can- 
cellation enabled. You can't acquire any resources, for example, including locking 
a mutex. That's because the cleanup code would have no way to determine 
Cancellation 151 
whether the mutex had been locked. Asynchronous cancellation can occur at any 
hardware instruction. On some computers it may even be possible to interrupt 
some instructions in the middle. That makes it really difficult to determine what 
the canceled thread was doing. 
For example, when you call ma Hoc the system allocates some heap memory 
for you, stores a pointer to that memory somewhere (possibly in a hardware regis- 
ter), and then returns to your code, which probably moves the return value into 
some local storage for later use. There are lots of places that malloc might be 
interrupted by an asynchronous cancel, with varying effects. It might be inter- 
rupted before the memory was allocated. Or it might be interrupted after 
allocating storage but before it stored the address for return. Or it might even 
return to your code, but get interrupted before the return value could be copied 
to a local variable. In any of those cases the variable where your code expects to 
find a pointer to the allocated memory will be uninitialized. You can't tell whether 
the memory really was allocated yet. You can't free the memory, so that memory 
(if it was allocated to you) will remain allocated for the life of the program. That's a 
memory leak, which is not a desirable feature. 
Or when you call pthread_mutex_lock, the system might be interrupted 
within a function call either before or after locking the mutex. Again, there's no 
way for your program to find out, because the interrupt may have occurred 
between any two instructions, even within the pthread_mutex_lock function, 
which might leave the mutex unusable. If the mutex is locked, the application will 
likely end up hanging because it will never be unlocked. 
I Call no code with asynchronous cancellation enabled unless you 
wrote it to be async-cancel safe！and even then,think twice! 
You are not allowed to call any function that acquires resources while asyn- 
chronous cancellation is enabled. In fact, you should never call any function 
while asynchronous cancellation is enabled unless the function is documented as 
"async-cancel safe." The only functions required to be async safe by Pthreads 
are pthread_cancel, pthread_setcancelstate, and pthread_setcanceltype. (And 
there is no reason to call pthread_cancel with asynchronous cancelability 
enabled.) No other POSIX or ANSI C functions need be async-cancel safe, and you 
should never call them with asynchronous cancelability enabled. 
Pthreads suggests that all library functions should document whether or not 
they are async-cancel safe. However if the description of a function does not spe- 
cifically say it is async-cancel safe you should always assume that it is not. The 
consequences of asynchronous cancellation in a function that is not async- 
cancel safe can be severe. And worse, the effects are sensitive to timing！so a 
function that appears to be async-cancel safe during experimentation may in fact 
cause all sorts of problems later when it ends up being canceled in a slightly dif- 
ferent place. 
The following program. cancel_async. c, shows the use of asynchronous can- 
cellation in a compute-bound loop. Use of asynchronous cancellation makes this 
152 CHAPTER 5 Advanced threaded programming 
loop "more responsive" than the deferred cancellation loop in cancel.c. However, 
the program would become unreliable if any function calls were made within the 
loop, whereas the deferred cancellation version would continue to function cor- 
rectly. In most cases, synchronous cancellation is preferable. 
24-28 To keep the thread running awhile with something more interesting than an 
empty loop, cancel_async.c uses a simple matrix multiply nested loop. The 
matrixa and matrixb arrays are initialized with, respectively, their major or minor 
array index. 
34-36 The cancellation type is changed to PTHREAD_CANCEL_ASYNCHRONOUS, allowing 
asynchronous cancellation within the matrix multiply loops. 
39-44 The thread repeats the matrix multiply until canceled, on each iteration 
replacing the first source array (matrixa) with the result of the previous multipli- 
cation (matrixc). 
66-74 Once again, on a Solaris system, set the thread concurrency level to 2, allow- 
ing the main thread and thread_routine to run concurrently on a uniprocessor. 
The program will hang without this step, since user mode threads are not 
timesliced on Solaris. 
| cancel_async.c 
1 #include <pthread.h> 
2 #include "errors.h" 
3 
4 #define SIZE 10 /* array size */ 
5 
6 static int matrixa[SIZE][SIZE] ; 
7 static int matrixb[SIZE][SIZE]; 
8 static int matrixc[SIZE][SIZE]; 
9 
10 /* 
11 * Loop until canceled. The thread can be canceled at any 
12 * point within the inner loop, where asynchronous cancellation 
13 * is enabled. The loop multiplies the two matrices matrixa 
14 * and matrixb. 
15 */ 
16 void *thread_routine (void *arg) 
17 { 
18 int cancel_type, status; 
19 int i, j, k, value = 1; 
20 
21 /* 
22 * Initialize the matrices to something arbitrary. 
23 */ 
24 for (i = 0; i < SIZE; i++) 
25 for (j = 0; j < SIZE; j++) { 
26 matrixa[i][j] = i; 
27 matrixb[i][j] = j; 
28 } 
29 
Cancellation 153 
30 while A) { 
31 /* 
32 * Compute the matrix product of matrixa and matrixb. 
33 */ 
34 status = pthread_setcanceltype ( 
35 PTHREAD_CANCEL_ASYNCHRONOUS, 
36 &cancel_type); 
37 if (status != 0) 
38 err_abort (status, "Set cancel type"); 
39 for (i = 0; i < SIZE; i++) 
40 for (j = 0; j < SIZE; j++) { 
41 matrixc[i][j] = 0; 
42 for (k = 0; k < SIZE; k++) 
43 matrixc[i][j] += matrixa[i][k] * matrixb[k][j]; 
44 } 
45 status = pthread_setcanceltype ( 
46 cancel_type, 
47 &cancel_type); 
48 if (status != 0) 
49 err_abort (status, "Set cancel type"); 
50 
51 /* 
52 * Copy the result (matrixc) into matrixa to start again 
53 */ 
54 for (i = 0; i < SIZE; i++) 
55 for (j = 0; j < SIZE; j++) 
56 matrixa[i][j] = matrixcfi][j]; 
57 } 
58 } 
59 
60 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
61 { 
62 pthread_t thread_id; 
63 void *result; 
64 int status; 
65 
66 #ifdef sun 
67 /* 
68 * On Solaris 2.5, threads are not timesliced. To ensure 
69 * that our two threads can run concurrently, we need to 
70 * increase the concurrency level to 2. 
71 */ 
72 DPRINTF (("Setting concurrency level to 2\n")); 
73 thr_setconcurrency B); 
74 #endif 
75 status = pthread_create ( 
76 &thread_id, NULL, thread_routine, NULL); 
77 if (status != 0) 
78 err_abort (status, "Create thread"); 
79 sleep A); 
154 CHAPTER 5 Advanced threaded programming 
80 status = pthread_cancel (thread_id); 
81 if (status != 0) 
82 err_abort (status, "Cancel thread"); 
83 status = pthread_join (thread_id, Sresult); 
84 if (status != 0) 
85 err_abort (status, "Join thread"); 
86 if (result == PTHREAD_CANCELED) 
87 printf ("Thread canceled\n"); 
88 else 
89 printf ("Thread was not canceled\n"); 
90 return 0; 
91 } 
| cancel_async.c 
I Warning: do not let "DCE threads'" habits carry over to Pthreads! 
I'll end this section with a warning. DCE threads, a critical component of the 
Open Software Foundation's Distributed Computing Environment, was designed 
to be independent of the underlying UNIX kernel. Systems with no thread support 
at all often emulated "thread synchronous" I/O in user mode, using nonblocking 
I/O mode, so that a thread attempting I/O on a busy file was blocked on a condi- 
tion variable until a later select or poll showed that the I/O could complete. 
DCE listener threads might block indefinitely on a socket read, and it was impor- 
tant to be able to cancel that read. 
When DCE was ported to newer kernels that had thread support, but not 
Pthreads support, the user mode I/O wrappers were usually omitted, resulting in 
a thread blocked within a kernel that did not support deferred cancellation. Users 
discovered that, in many cases, these systems implemented asynchronous can- 
cellation in such a way that, quite by coincidence, a kernel wait might be 
canceled "safely" if the thread switched to asynchronous cancellation immedi- 
ately before the kernel call, and switched back to deferred cancellation 
immediately after. This observation was publicized in DCE documentation, but it 
is a very dangerous hack, even on systems where it seems to work. You should 
never try this on any Pthreads system! If your system conforms to POSIX 
1003. lc-1995 (or POSIX 1003.1, 1996 edition, or later), it supports deferred can- 
cellation of, at minimum, kernel functions such as read and write. You do not 
need asynchronous cancellation, and using it can be extremely dangerous. 
5.3.3 Cleaning up 
I When you write any library code, design it to handle deferred 
cancellation gracefully. Disable cancellation where it is not 
appropriate, and always use cleanup handlers at cancellation points. 
Cancellation 155 
If a section of code needs to restore some state when it is canceled, it must use 
cleanup handlers. When a thread is canceled while waiting for a condition vari- 
able, it will wake up with the mutex locked. Before the thread terminates it 
usually needs to restore invariants, and it always needs to release the mutex. 
Each thread may be considered to have a stack of active cleanup handlers. 
Cleanup handlers are added to the stack by calling pthread_cleanup_push, and the 
most recently added cleanup handler is removed by calling pthread_cleanup_ 
pop. When the thread is canceled or when it exits by calling pthread_exit, 
Pthreads calls each active cleanup handler in turn, beginning with the most 
recently added cleanup handler. When all active cleanup handlers have returned, 
the thread is terminated. 
Pthreads cleanup handlers are designed so that you can often use the cleanup 
handler even when the thread wasn't canceled. It is often useful to run the same 
cleanup function regardless of whether your code is canceled or completes nor- 
mally. When pthread_cleanup_pop is called with a nonzero value, the cleanup 
handler is executed even if the thread was not canceled. 
You cannot push a cleanup handler in one function and pop it in another func- 
tion. The pthread_cleanup_push and pthread_cleanup_pop operations may be 
defined as macros, such that pthread_cleanup_push contains the opening brace 
"{" of a block, while pthread_cleanup_pop contains the matching closing brace "}" 
of the block. You must always keep this restriction in mind while using cleanup 
handlers, if you wish your code to be portable. 
The following program, cancel_cleanup.c, shows the use of a cleanup han- 
dler to release a mutex when a condition variable wait is canceled. 
10-17 The control structure (control) is used by all threads to maintain shared syn- 
chronization objects and invariants. Each thread increases the member counter 
by one when it starts, and decreases it at termination. The member busy is used 
as a dummy condition wait predicate！it is initialized to 1, and never cleared, 
which means that the condition wait loops will never terminate (in this example) 
until the threads are canceled. 
24-34 The function cleanup_handler is installed as the cancellation cleanup han- 
dler for each thread. It is called on normal termination as well as through 
cancellation, to decrease the count of active threads and unlock the mutex. 
47 The function thread_routine establishes cleanup_handler as the active can- 
cellation cleanup handler. 
54-58 Wait until the control structure's busy member is set to 0, which, in this 
example, will never occur. The condition wait loop will exit only when the wait is 
canceled. 
60 Although the condition wait loop in this example will not exit, the function 
cleans up by removing the active cleanup handler. The nonzero argument to 
pthread_cleanup_pop, remember, means that the cleanup handler will be called 
even though cancellation did not occur. 
In some cases, you may omit "unreachable statements" like this pthread_ 
cleanup_pop call. However, in this case, your code might not compile without it. 
The pthread_cleanup_push and pthread_cleanup_pop macros are special, and 
may expand to form, respectively, the beginning and ending of a block. Digital 
156 CHAPTER 5 Advanced threaded programming 
UNIX does this, for example, to implement cancellation on top of the common 
structured exception handling provided by the operating system. 
| cancel_cleanup.c 
1 #include <pthread.h> 
2 #include "errors.h" 
3 
4 #define THREADS 5 
5 
6 /* 
7 * Control structure shared by the test threads, containing 
8 * the synchronization and invariant data. 
9 */ 
10 typedef struct control_tag { 
11 int counter, busy; 
12 pthread_mutex_t mutex; 
13 pthread_cond_t cv; 
14 } control_t; 
15 
16 control_t control = 
17 {0, 1, PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER, PTHREAD_COND_INITIALIZER}; 
18 
19 /* 
20 * This routine is installed as the cancellation cleanup 
21 * handler around the cancelable condition wait. It will 
22 * be called by the system when the thread is canceled. 
23 */ 
24 void cleanup_handler (void *arg) 
25 { 
26 control_t *st = (control_t *)arg; 
27 int status; 
28 
29 st->counter！; 
30 printf ("cleanup_handler: counter == %d\n", st->counter); 
31 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (&st->mutex); 
32 if (status != 0) 
33 err_abort (status, "Unlock in cleanup handler"); 
34 } 
35 
36 /* 
37 * Multiple threads are created running this routine (controlled 
38 * by the THREADS macro). They maintain a "counter" invariant, 
39 * which expresses the number of running threads. They specify a 
40 * nonzero value to pthread_cleanup_pop to run the same 
41 * "finalization" action when cancellation does not occur. 
42 */ 
43 void *thread_routine (void *arg) 
44 { 
45 int status; 
Cancellation 157 
46 
47 pthread_cleanup_push (cleanup_handler, (void*)scontrol); 
48 
49 status = pthread_mutex_lock (Scontrol.mutex); 
50 if (status != 0) 
51 err_abort (status, "Mutex lock"); 
52 control.counter++; 
53 
54 while (control.busy) { 
55 status = pthread_cond_wait (Scontrol.cv, {.control.mutex); 
56 if (status != 0) 
57 err_abort (status, "Wait on condition"); 
58 } 
59 
60 pthread_cleanup_pop A); 
61 return NULL; 
62 } 
63 
64 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
65 { 
66 pthread_t thread_id[THREADS]; 
67 int count; 
68 void *result; 
69 int status; 
70 
71 for (count = 0; count < THREADS; count++) { 
72 status = pthread_create ( 
73 &thread_id[count], NULL, thread_routine, NULL); 
74 if (status != 0) 
75 err abort (status, "Create thread"); 
76 } 
77 
78 sleep B); 
79 
80 for (count = 0; count < THREADS; count++) { 
81 status = pthread_cancel (thread_id[count]); 
82 if (status != 0) 
83 err_abort (status, "Cancel thread"); 
84 
85 status = pthread_join (thread_id[count], Sresult); 
86 if (status != 0) 
87 err_abort (status, "Join thread"); 
88 if (result == PTHREAD_CANCELED) 
89 printf ("thread %d canceled\n", count); 
90 else 
91 printf ("thread %d was not canceled\n", count); 
92 } 
93 return 0; 
94 } 
| cancel_cleanup.c 
158 CHAPTER 5 Advanced threaded programming 
If one of your threads creates a set of threads to "subcontract" some function, 
say, a parallel arithmetic operation, and the "contractor" is canceled while the 
function is in progress, you probably won't want to leave the subcontractor 
threads running. Instead, you could "pass on" the cancellation to each subcon- 
trator thread, letting them handle their own termination independently. 
If you had originally intended to join with the subcontractors, remember that 
they will continue to consume some resources until they have been joined or 
detached. When the contractor thread cancels them, you should not delay can- 
cellation by joining with the subcontractors. Instead, you can cancel each thread 
and immediately detach it using pthread_detach. The subcontractor resources 
can then be recycled immediately as they finish, while the contractor can wrap 
things up independently. 
The following program, cancel_subcontract.c, shows one way to propagate 
cancellation to subcontractors. 
9-12 The team_t structure defines the state of the team of subcontractor threads. 
The join_i member records the index of the last subcontractor with which the 
contractor had joined, so on cancellation from within pthread_join, it can cancel 
the threads it had not yet joined. The workers member is an array recording the 
thread identifiers of the subcontractor threads. 
18-25 The subcontractor threads are started running the worker_routine function. 
This function loops until canceled, calling pthread_testcancel every 1000 
iterations. 
31-46 The cleanup function is established as the active cleanup handler within the 
contractor thread. When the contractor is canceled, cleanup iterates through the 
remaining (unjoined) subcontractors, cancelling and detaching each. Note that it 
does not join the subcontractors！in general, it is not a good idea to wait in a 
cleanup handler. The thread, after all, is expected to clean up and terminate, not to 
wait around for something to happen. But if your cleanup handler really needs 
to wait for something, don't be afraid, it will work just fine. 
53-76 The contractor thread is started running thread_routine. This function creates 
a set of subcontractors, then joins with each subcontractor. As it joins each 
thread, it records the current index within the workers array in the team_t mem- 
ber join_i. The cleanup handler is established with a pointer to the team 
structure so that it can determine the last offset and begin cancelling the remain- 
ing subcontractors. 
78-104 The main program creates the contractor thread, running thread_routine, 
and then sleeps for five seconds. When it wakes up, it cancels the contractor 
thread, and waits for it to terminate. 
| cancel_subcontract.c 
1 #include <pthread.h> 
2 #include "errors.h" 
3 
4 #define THREADS 5 
5 
Cancellation 
159 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 
38 
39 
40 
41 
42 
43 
44 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
51 
52 
53 
/* 
* Structure that defines the threads in a "team.1 
*/ 
typedef struct team_tag { 
int join_i; /* 
pthread_t workers[THREADS]; /* 
} team t; 
join index */ 
thread identifiers 
*/ 
They loop waiting for a 
/* 
* Start routine for worker threads. 
* cancellation request. 
*/ 
void *worker_routine (void *arg) 
int counter; 
for (counter =0; ; counter++) 
if ((counter % 1000) == 0) 
pthread_testcancel (); 
> 
/* 
* Cancellation cleanup handler for the contractor thread. 
* will cancel and detach each worker in the team. 
*/ 
void cleanup (void *arg) 
team_t *team = (team_t *)arg; 
int count, status; 
for (count = team->join_i; count < THREADS; count++) { 
status = pthread_cancel (team->workers[count]); 
if (status != 0) 
err_abort (status, "Cancel worker"); 
status = pthread_detach (team->workers[count]); 
if (status != 0) 
err_abort (status, "Detach worker"); 
printf ("Cleanup: canceled %d\n", count); 
It 
/* 
* Thread start routine for the contractor. It creates a team of 
* worker threads, and then joins with them. When canceled, the 
* cleanup handler will cancel and detach the remaining threads. 
*/ 
void *thread routine (void *arg) 
160 CHAPTER 5 Advanced threaded programming 
54 { 
55 team_t team; /* team info */ 
56 int count; 
57 void *result; /* Return status */ 
58 int status; 
59 
60 for (count = 0; count < THREADS; count++) { 
61 status = pthread_create ( 
62 Steam.workers[count], NULL, worker_routine, NULL); 
63 if (status != 0) 
64 err_abort (status, "Create worker"); 
65 } 
66 pthread_cleanup_push (cleanup, (void*)Steam); 
67 
68 for (team.join_i = 0; team.join_i < THREADS; team.join_i++) { 
69 status = pthread_join (team.workers[team.join_i], Sresult); 
70 if (status != 0) 
71 err_abort (status, "Join worker"); 
72 } 
73 
74 pthread_cleanup_pop @); 
75 return NULL; 
76 } 
77 
78 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
79 { 
80 pthread_t thread_id; 
81 int status; 
82 
83 #ifdef sun 
84 /* 
85 * On Solaris 2.5, threads are not timesliced. To ensure 
86 * that our threads can run concurrently, we need to 
87 * increase the concurrency level to at least 2 plus THREADS 
88 * (the number of workers). 
89 */ 
90 DPRINTF (("Setting concurrency level to %d\n", THREADS+2)); 
91 thr_setconcurrency (THREADS+2); 
92 #endif 
93 status = pthread_create (&thread_id, NULL, thread_routine, NULL); 
94 if (status != 0) 
95 err_abort (status, "Create team"); 
96 sleep E); 
97 printf ("Cancelling...\n"); 
98 status = pthread_cancel (thread_id); 
99 if (status != 0) 
100 err abort (status, "Cancel team"); 
Thread-specific data 161 
101 status = pthread_join (thread_id, NULL); 
102 if (status != 0) 
103 err_abort (status, "Join team"); 
104 } 
| cancel subcontract.c 
5.4 Thread-specific data 
No, I've made up my mind about it: if I'm Mabel, I'll stay down here. It'll be 
no use their putting their heads down and saying "Come up again, 
dear!" I shall only look up and say "Who am I, then? Tell me that first, and 
then, if I like being that person, I'll come up: if not, I'll stay down here till 
I'm somebody else." 
！Lewis Carroll, Alice's Adventures in Wonderland 
When a function in a single threaded program needs to create private data 
that persists across calls to that function, the data can be allocated statically in 
memory. The name's scope can be limited to the function or file that uses it 
(static) or it can be made global (extern). 
It is not quite that simple when you use threads. All threads within a process 
share the same address space, which means that any variable declared as static 
or extern, or in the process heap, may be read and written by all threads within 
the process. That has several important implications for code that wants to store 
"persistent" data between a series of function calls within a thread: 
? The value in a static or extern variable, or in the heap, will be the value 
last written by any thread. In some cases this may be what you want, for 
example, to maintain the seed of a pseudorandom number sequence. In 
other cases, it may not be what you want. 
? The only storage a thread has that's truly "private" are processor registers. 
Even stack addresses can be shared, although only if the "owner" deliber- 
ately exposes an address to another thread. In any event, neither registers 
nor "private" stack can replace uses of persistent static storage in non- 
threaded code. 
So when you need a private variable, you must first decide whether all threads 
share the same value, or whether each thread should have its own value. If they 
share, then you can use static or extern data, just as you could in a single 
threaded program; however, you must synchronize access to the shared data 
across multiple threads, usually by adding one or more mutexes. 
If each thread needs its own value for a private variable, then you must store 
all the values somewhere, and each thread must be able to locate the proper 
value. In some cases you might be able to use static data, for example, a table 
162 CHAPTER 5 Advanced threaded programming 
where you can search for a value unique to each thread, such as the thread's 
pthread_t. In many interesting cases you cannot predict how many threads might 
call the function！imagine you were implementing a thread-safe library that could 
be called by arbitrary code, in any number of threads. 
The most general solution is to malloc some heap in each thread and store the 
values there, but your code will need to be able to find the proper private data in 
any thread. You could create a linked list of all the private values, storing the cre- 
ating thread's identifier (pthread_t) so it could be found again, but that will be 
slow if there are many threads. You need to search the list to find the proper 
value, and it would be difficult to recover the storage that was allocated by termi- 
nated threads！your function cannot know when a thread terminates. 
I New interfaces should not rely on implicit persistent storage! 
When you are designing new interfaces, there's a better solution. You should 
require the caller to allocate the necessary persistent state, and tell you where it 
is. There are many advantages to this model, including, most importantly: 
? In many cases, you can avoid internal synchronization using this model, 
and, in rare cases where the caller wishes to share the persistent state 
between threads, the caller can supply the needed synchronization. 
? The caller can instead choose to allocate more than one state buffer for use 
within a single thread. The result is several independent sequences of calls 
to your function within the same thread, with no conflict. 
The problem is that you often need to support implicit persistent states. You may 
be making an existing interface thread-safe, and cannot add an argument to the 
functions, or require that the caller maintain a new data structure for your bene- 
fit. That's where thread-specific data comes in. 
Thread-specific data allows each thread to have a separate copy of a variable, 
as if each thread has an array of thread-specific data values, which is indexed by 
a common "key" value. Imagine that the bailing programmers are wearing their 
corporate ID badges, clipped to their shirt pockets (Figure 5.2). While the infor- 
mation is different for each programmer, you can find the information easily 
without already knowing which programmer you're examining. 
The program creates a key (sort of like posting a corporate regulation that 
employee identification badges always be displayed clipped to the left breast 
pocket of the employee's shirt or jacket) and each thread can then independently 
set or get its own value for that key (although the badge is always on the left 
pocket, each employee has a unique badge number, and, in most cases, a unique 
name). The key is the same for all threads, but each thread can associate its own 
independent value with that shared key. Each thread can change its private value 
for a key at any time, without affecting the key or any value other threads may 
have for the key. 
Thread-specific data 
163 
FIGURE 5.2 Thread-specific data analogy 
5.4.1 Creating thread-specific data 
pthread_key_t key; 
int pthread_key_create ( 
pthread_key_t *key, void (*destructor)(void *)); 
int pthread_key_delete (pthread_key_t key); 
A thread-specific data key is represented in your program by a variable of type 
pthread_key_t. Like most Pthreads types, pthread_key_t is opaque and you 
should never make any assumptions about the structure or content. The easiest 
way to create a thread-specific data key is to call pthread_key_create before any 
threads try to use the key, for example early in the program's main function. 
If you need to create a thread-specific data key later, you have to ensure that 
pthread_key_create is called only once for each pthread_key_t variable. That's 
because if you create a key twice, you are really creating two different keys. The 
second key will overwrite the first, which will be lost forever along with the values 
any threads might have set for the first key. 
When you can't add code to main, the easiest way to ensure that a thread- 
specific data key is created only once is to use pthread_once, the one-time initiali- 
zation function, as shown in the following program, tsd_once.c. 
164 CHAPTER 5 Advanced threaded programming 
7-10 The tsd_t structure is used to contain per-thread data. Each thread allocates 
a private tsd_t structure, and stores a pointer to that structure as its value for 
the thread-specific data key tsd_key. The thread_id member holds the thread's 
identifier (pthread_t), and the string member holds the pointer to a "name" 
string for the thread. The variable tsd_key holds the thread-specific data key 
used to access the tsd_t structures. 
19-27 One-time initialization (pthread_once) is used to ensure that the key tsd_key 
is created before the first access. 
33-56 The threads begin in the thread start function thread_routine. The argument 
(arg) is a pointer to a character string naming the thread. Each thread calls 
pthread_once to ensure that the thread-specific data key has been created. The 
thread then allocates a tsd_t structure, initializes the thread_id member with 
the thread's identifier, and copies its argument to the string member. 
The thread gets the current thread-specific data value by calling pthread_ 
getspecif ic, and prints a message using the thread's name. It then sleeps for a 
few seconds and prints another message to demonstrate that the thread-specific 
data value remains the same, even though another thread has assigned a differ- 
ent tsd_t structure address to the same thread-specific data key. 
| tsd_once.c 
1 tinclude <pthread.h> 
2 #include "errors.h" 
3 
4 /* 
5 * Structure used as the value for thread-specific data key. 
6 */ 
7 typedef struct tsd_tag { 
8 pthread_t thread_id; 
9 char *string; 
10 } tsd_t; 
11 
12 pthread_key_t tsd_key; /* Thread-specific data key */ 
13 pthread_once_t key_once = PTHREAD_ONCE_INIT; 
14 
15 /* 
16 * One-time initialization routine used with the pthread_once 
17 * control block. 
18 */ 
19 void once_routine (void) 
20 { 
21 int status; 
22 
23 printf ("initializing key\n"); 
24 status = pthread_key_create (&tsd_key, NULL); 
25 if (status != 0) 
26 err_abort (status, "Create key"); 
27 } 
Thread-specific data 165 
28 
29 /* 
30 * Thread start routine that uses pthread_once to dynamically 
31 * create a thread-specific data key. 
32 */ 
33 void *thread_routine (void *arg) 
34 { 
35 tsd_t *value; 
36 int status; 
37 
38 status = pthread_once (&key_once, once_routine); 
39 if (status != 0) 
40 err_abort (status, "Once init"); 
41 value = (tsd_t*)malloc (sizeof (tsd_t)); 
42 if (value == NULL) 
43 errno_abort ("Allocate key value"); 
44 status = pthread_setspecific (tsd_key, value); 
45 if (status != 0) 
46 err_abort (status, "Set tsd"); 
47 printf ("%s set tsd value %p\n", arg, value); 
48 value->thread_id = pthread_self (); 
49 value->string = (char*)arg; 
50 value = (tsd_t*)pthread_getspecific (tsd_key); 
51 printf ("%s starting...\n" , value->string); 
52 sleep B); 
53 value = (tsd_t*)pthread_getspecific (tsd_key); 
54 printf ("%s done...\n", value->string); 
55 return NULL; 
56 } 
57 
58 void main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
59 { 
60 pthread_t threadl, thread2; 
61 int status; 
62 
63 status = pthread_create ( 
64 Srthreadl, NULL, thread_routine, "thread 1"); 
65 if (status != 0) 
66 err_abort (status, "Create thread 1"); 
67 status = pthread_create ( 
68 &thread2, NULL, thread_routine, "thread 2"); 
69 if (status != 0) 
70 err_abort (status, "Create thread 2"); 
71 pthread_exit (NULL); 
72 } 
| tsd once.c 
166 CHAPTER 5 Advanced threaded programming 
Pthreads allows you to destroy a thread-specific data key when your program 
no longer needs it, by calling pthread_key_delete. The Pthreads standard guar- 
antees only 128 thread-specific data keys at any one time, so it may be useful to 
destroy a key that you know you aren't using and won't need again. The actual 
number of keys supported by your Pthreads system is specified by the value of 
the symbol PTHREAD_KEYS_MAX defined in <limits.h>. 
When you destroy a thread-specific data key, it does not affect the current 
value of that key in any thread, not even in the calling thread. That means your 
code is completely responsible for freeing any memory that you have associated 
with the thread-specific data key, in all threads. Of course, any use of the deleted 
thread-specific data key (pthread_key_t) results in undefined behavior. 
Delete thread-specific data keys only when you 
are sure no thread has a value for that key! 
Or... don't destroy them at all. 
You should never destroy a key while some thread still has a value for that 
key. Some later call to pthread_key_create, for example, might reuse the 
pthread_key_t identifier that had been assigned to a deleted key. When an exist- 
ing thread that had set a value for the old key requests the value of the new key, it 
will receive the old value. The program will likely react badly to receiving this 
incorrect data, so you should never delete a thread-specific data key until you are 
sure that no existing threads have a value for that key, for example, by maintain- 
ing a "reference count" for the key, as shown in the program tsd_destructor.c. 
in Section 5.4.3. 
Even better, don't destroy thread-specific data keys. There's rarely any need to 
do so, and if you try you will almost certainly run into difficulties. Few programs 
will require even the minimum Pthreads limit of 128 thread-specific data keys. 
Rarely will you use more than a few. In general, each component that uses 
thread-specific data will have a small number of keys each maintaining pointers 
to data structures that contain related data. It would take a lot of components to 
exhaust the available keys! 
5.4.2 Using thread-specific data 
int pthread_setspecific ( 
pthread_key_t key, const void *value); 
void *pthread_getspecific (pthread_key_t key); 
You can use the pthread_getspecif ic function to determine the thread's cur- 
rent value for a key, or pthread_setspecif ic to change the current value. Take a 
look at Section 7.3.1 for ideas on using thread-specific data to adapt old libraries 
that rely on static data to be thread-safe. 
Thread-specific data 167 
I A thread-specific data value of null means something special to 
Pthreads！do not set a thread-specific data value of null unless you 
really mean it, 
The initial value for any new key (in all threads) is null. Also, Pthreads sets 
the thread-specific data value for a key to null before calling that key's destruc- 
tor (passing the previous value of the key) when a thread terminates.* If your 
thread-specific data value is the address of heap storage, for example, and you 
want to free that storage in your destructor, you must use the argument passed 
to the destructor rather than calling pthread_getspecif ic. 
Pthreads will not call the destructor for a thread-specific data key if the termi- 
nating thread has a value of NULL for that key. null is special, meaning "this key 
has no value." If you ever use pthread_setspecif ic to set the value of a thread- 
specific data key to null, you need to remember that you are not setting the value 
null, but rather stating that the key no longer has a value in the current thread. 
I Destructor functions are called only when the thread terminates, 
not when the value of a thread-specific data key is changed. 
Another important thing to remember is that thread-specific data key destruc- 
tor functions are not called when you replace an existing value for that key. That 
is, if you allocate a structure in heap and assign a pointer to that structure as the 
value of a thread-specific data key, and then later allocate a new structure and 
assign a pointer to that new structure to the same thread-specific data key, in the 
same thread, you are responsible for freeing the old structure. Pthreads will not 
free the old structure, nor will it call your destructor function with a pointer to 
the old structure. 
5.4.3 Using destructor functions 
When a thread exits while it has a value defined for some thread-specific data 
key, you usually need to do something about it. If your key's value is a pointer to 
heap memory, you will need to free the memory to avoid a memory leak each 
time a thread terminates. Pthreads allows you to define a destructor function 
"That is, unfortunately, not what the standard says. This is one of the problems with formal 
standards！they say what they say, not what they were intended to say. Somehow, an error crept 
in, and the sentence specifying that "the implementation clears the thread-specific data value be- 
fore calling the destructor" was deleted. Nobody noticed, and the standard was approved with the 
error. So the standard says (by omission) that if you want to write a portable application using 
thread-specific data, that will not hang on thread termination, you must call pthread_setspe- 
cif ic within your destructor function to change the value to null. This would be silly, and any 
serious implementation of Pthreads will violate the standard in this respect. Of course, the stan- 
dard will be fixed, probably by the 1003. In amendment (assorted corrections to 1003. lc-1995), 
but that will take a while. 
168 CHAPTER 5 Advanced threaded programming 
when you create a thread-specific data key. When a thread terminates with a 
non-NULL value for a thread-specific data key, the key's destructor (if any) is 
called with the current value of the key. 
I Thread-specific data destructors are called in "unspecified order." 
Pthreads checks all thread-specific data keys in the process when a thread 
exits, and for each thread-specific data key with a value that's not NULL, it sets 
the value to null and then calls the key's destructor function. Going back to our 
analogy, someone might collect the identity badges of all programmers by remov- 
ing whatever is hanging from each programmer's left shirt pocket, safe in the 
knowledge that it will always be the programmer's badge. Be careful, because the 
order in which destructors are called is undefined. Try to make each destructor 
as independent as possible. 
Thread-specific data destructors can set a new value for the key for which a 
value is being destroyed or for any other key. You should never do this directly, 
but it can easily happen indirectly if you call other functions from your destruc- 
tor. For example, the ANSI C library's destructors might be called before yours！ 
and calling an ANSI C function, for example, using fprintf to write a log mes- 
sage to a file, could cause a new value to be assigned to a thread-specific data 
key. The system must recheck the list of thread-specific data values for you after 
all destructors have been called. 
I If your thread-specific data destructor creates a new thread-specific 
data value,you will get another chance. Maybe too many chancesl 
The standard requires that a Pthreads implementation may recheck the list 
some fixed number of times and then give up. When it gives up, the final thread- 
specific data value is not destroyed. If the value is a pointer to heap memory, 
the result may be a memory leak, so be careful. The <limits .h> header defines 
_pthread_destructor_iterations to the number of times the system will check, 
and the value must be at least 4. Alternately, the system is allowed to keep 
checking forever, so a destructor function that always sets thread-specific data 
values may cause an infinite loop. 
Usually, new thread-specific data values are set within a destructor only when 
subsystem 1 uses thread-specific data that depends on another independent sub- 
system 2 that also uses thread-specific data. Because the order in which 
destructor functions run is unspecified, the two may be called in the wrong order. 
If the subsystem 1 destructor needs to call into subsystem 2, it may inadvertently 
result in allocating new thread-specific data for subsystem 2. Although the sub- 
system 2 destructor will need to be called again to free the new data, the 
subsystem 1 thread-specific data remains NULL, so the loop will terminate. 
The following program, tsd_destructor.c, demonstrates using thread- 
specific data destructors to release memory when a thread terminates. It also 
keeps track of how many threads are using the thread-specific data, and deletes 
Thread-specific data 169 
the thread-specific data key when the destructor is run for the final thread. This 
program is similar in structure to tsd_once.c, from Section 5.3, so only the rele- 
vant differences will be annotated here. 
12-14 In addition to the key value (identity_key), the program maintains a count of 
threads that are using the key (identity_key_counter), which is protected by a 
mutex (identity_key_mutex). 
22-42 The function identity_key_destructor is the thread-specific data key's 
destructor function. It begins by printing a message so we can observe when it 
runs in each thread. It frees the storage used to maintain thread-specific data, 
the private_t structure. Then it locks the mutex associated with the thread- 
specific data key (identity_key_mutex) and decreases the count of threads using 
the key. If the count reaches 0, it deletes the key and prints a message. 
48-63 The function identity_key_get can be used anywhere (in this example, it is 
used only once per thread) to get the value of identity_key for the calling thread. 
If there is no current value (the value is NULL), then it allocates a new private_t 
structure and assigns it to the key for future reference. 
68-78 The function thread_routine is the thread start function used by the exam- 
ple. It acquires a value for the key by calling identity_key_get, and sets the 
members of the structure. The string member is set to the thread's argument, 
creating a global "name" for the thread, which can be used for printing messages. 
80-114 The main program creates the thread-specific data key tsd_key. Notice that, 
unlike tsd_once. c, this program does not bother to use pthread_once. As I men- 
tioned in the annotation for that example, in a main program it is perfectly safe, 
and more efficient, to create the key inside main, before creating any threads. 
101 The main program initializes the reference counter (identity_key_counter) 
to 3. It is critical that you define in advance how many threads will reference a 
key that will be deleted based on a reference count, as we intend to do. The 
counter must be set before any thread using the key can possibly terminate. 
You cannot, for example, code identity_key_get so that it dynamically 
increases the counter when it first assigns a thread-specific value for identity_ 
key. That is because one thread might assign a thread-specific value for 
identity_key and then terminate before another thread using the key had a 
chance to start. If that happened, the first thread's destructor would find no 
remaining references to the key, and it would delete the key. Later threads would 
then fail when trying to set thread-specific data values. 
| tsd_destructor.c 
1 #include <pthread.h> 
2 #include "errors.h" 
3 
4 /* 
5 * Structure used as value of thread-specific data key. 
6 */ 
170 CHAPTER 5 Advanced threaded programming 
1 typedef struct private_tag { 
8 pthread_t thread_id; 
9 char *string; 
10 } private_t; 
11 
12 pthread_key_t identity_key; /* Thread-specific data key */ 
13 pthread_mutex_t identity_key_mutex = PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER; 
14 long identity_key_counter = 0; 
15 
16 /* 
17 * This routine is called as each thread terminates with a value 
18 * for the thread-specific data key. It keeps track of how many 
19 * threads still have values, and deletes the key when there are 
20 * no more references. 
21 */ 
22 void identity_key_destructor (void *value) 
23 { 
24 private_t *private = (private_t*)value; 
25 int status; 
26 
27 printf ("thread \"%s\" exiting...\n", private->string); 
28 free (value); 
29 status = pthread_mutex_lock (&identity_key_mutex); 
30 if (status != 0) 
31 err_abort (status, "Lock key mutex"); 
32 identity_key_counter！; 
33 if (identity_key_counter <= 0) { 
34 status = pthread_key_delete (identity_key); 
35 if (status != 0) 
36 err_abort (status, "Delete key"); 
37 printf ("key deleted...\n"); 
38 } 
39 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (&identity_key_mutex); 
40 if (status != 0) 
41 err_abort (status, "Unlock key mutex"); 
42 } 
43 
44 /* 
45 * Helper routine to allocate a new value for thread-specific 
46 * data key if the thread doesn't already have one. 
47 */ 
48 void *identity_key_get (void) 
49 { 
50 void *value; 
51 int status; 
52 
53 value = pthread_getspecific (identity_key); 
Thread-specific data 171 
54 if (value == NULL) { 
55 value = malloc (sizeof (private_t)); 
56 if (value == NULL) 
57 errno_abort ("Allocate key value"); 
58 status = pthread_setspecific (identity_key, (void*)value); 
59 if (status != 0) 
60 err_abort (status, "Set TSD"); 
61 } 
62 return value; 
63 } 
64 
65 /* 
66 * Thread start routine to use thread-specific data. 
67 */ 
68 void *thread_routine (void *arg) 
69 { 
70 private_t *value; 
71 
72 value = (private_t*)identity_key_get (); 
73 value->thread_id = pthread_self (); 
74 value->string = (char*)arg; 
75 printf ("thread \"%s\" starting...\n", value->string); 
76 sleep B); 
77 return NULL; 
78 } 
79 
80 void main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
81 { 
82 pthread_t thread_l, thread_2; 
83 private_t *value; 
84 int status; 
85 
86 /* 
87 * Create the TSD key, and set the reference counter to 
88 * the number of threads that will use it (two thread_routine 
89 * threads plus main). This must be done before creating 
90 * the threads! Otherwise, if one thread runs the key's 
91 * destructor before any other thread uses the key, it will 
92 * be deleted. 
93 * 
94 * Note that there's rarely any good reason to delete a 
95 * thread-specific data key. 
96 */ 
97 status = pthread_key_create ( 
98 &identity_key, identity_key_destructor); 
99 if (status != 0) 
100 err_abort (status, "Create key"); 
172 CHAPTER 5 Advanced threaded programming 
101 identity_key_counter = 3; 
102 value = (private_t*)identity_key_get (); 
103 value->thread_id = pthread_self (); 
104 value->string = "Main thread"; 
105 status = pthread_create (&thread_l, NULL, 
106 thread_routine, "Thread 1"); 
107 if (status != 0) 
108 err_abort (status, "Create thread 1"); 
109 status = pthread_create (&thread_2, NULL, 
110 thread_routine, "Thread 2"); 
111 if (status != 0) 
112 err_abort (status, "Create thread 2"); 
113 pthread_exit (NULL); 
114 } 
| tsd destructor.c 
5.5 Realtime scheduling 
"Well, it's no use your talking about waking him," said Tweedledum, 
"when you're only one of the things in his dream. You know 
very well you're not real." 
"I am real!" said Alice, and began to cry. 
"You wo'n't make yourself a bit realler by crying," Tweedledee remarked: 
"there's nothing to cry about." 
！Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking-Glass 
Once upon a time, realtime programming was considered an arcane and rare 
art. Realtime programmers were doing unusual things, outside of the program- 
ming mainstream, like controlling nuclear reactors or airplane navigational 
systems. But the POSIX. lb realtime extension defines realtime as "the ability of the 
operating system to provide a required level of service in a bounded response time." 
What applies to the operating system also applies to your application or library. 
"Bounded" response time does not necessarily mean "fast" response, but it 
does mean "predictable" response. There must be some way to define a span of 
time during which a sequence of operations is guaranteed to complete. A system 
controlling a nuclear reactor has more strict response requirements than most 
programs you will write, and certainly the consequences of failing to meet the 
reactor's response requirements are more severe. But a lot of code you write will 
need to provide some "required level of service" within some "bounded response 
time." Realtime programming just means that the software lives in the real world. 
Realtime programming covers such a vast area that it is common to divide it 
into two separate categories. "Hard realtime" is the traditional sort most people 
Realtime scheduling 173 
think of. When your nuclear reactor will go critical if a fuel rod adjustment is 
delayed by a microsecond or your airplane will crash if the navigation system 
takes a half second to respond to a wind sheer, that's hard realtime. Hard realtime 
is unforgiving, because the required level of service and bounded response time are 
defined by physics or something equally unyielding. "Soft realtime" means that 
you need to meet your schedule most of the time, but the consequences of failing 
to meet the schedule are not severe. 
Many systems that interact with humans should be designed according to soft 
realtime principles. Although humans react slowly, in computer terms, they're 
sensitive to response time. Make your users wait too often while the screen 
redraws before accepting the next mouse click, and they'll be annoyed. Nobody 
likes a "busy cursor"！most people expect response to be at least predictable, 
even when it cannot be fast. 
Threads are useful for all types of realtime programming, because coding for 
predictable response is far easier when you can keep the operations separate. 
Your "user input function" doesn't have to wait for your sort operation or for your 
screen update operation because it executes independently. 
Achieving predictability requires a lot more than just separating operations 
into different threads, however. For one thing, you need to make sure that the 
thread you need to run "soon" won't be left sitting on a run queue somewhere 
while another thread uses the processor. Most systems, by default, will try to dis- 
tribute resources more or less fairly between threads. That's nice for a lot of 
things！but realtime isn't fair. Realtime means carefully giving precedence to the 
parts of the program that limit external response time. 
5.5.1 POSIX realtime options 
The POSIX standards are flexible, because they're designed to be useful in a 
wide range of environments. In particular, since traditional UNIX systems don't 
support any form of realtime scheduling control, all of the tools for controlling 
realtime response are optional. The fact that a given implementation of UNIX 
"conforms to 1003.1c-1995" does not mean you can write predictable realtime 
programs. 
If the system defines _posix_thread_priority_scheduling, it provides sup- 
port for assigning realtime scheduling priorities to threads. The POSIX priority 
scheduling model is a little more complicated than the traditional UNIX priority 
model, but the principle is similar. Priority scheduling allows the programmer to 
give the system an idea of how important any two threads are, relative to each 
other. Whenever more than one thread is ready to execute, the system will choose 
the thread with the highest priority. 
174 
CHAPTER 5 Advanced threaded programming 
5.5.2 Scheduling policies and priorities 
int sched_get_priority_max (int policy); 
int sched_get_priority_min (int policy); 
int pthread_attr_getinheritsched ( 
const pthread_attr_t *attr, int *inheritsched); 
int pthread_attr_setinheritsched ( 
pthread_attr_t *attr, int inheritsched); 
int pthread_attr_getschedparam ( 
const pthread_attr_t *attr, 
struct sched_param *param); 
int pthread_attr_setschedparam ( 
pthread_attr_t *attr, 
const struct sched_param *param); 
int pthread_attr_getschedpolicy ( 
const pthread_attr_t *attr, int *policy); 
int pthread_attr_setschedpolicy ( 
pthread_attr_t *attr, int policy); 
int pthread_getschedparam (pthread_t thread, 
int *policy, struct sched_j?aram *param); 
int pthread_setschedparam ( 
pthread_t thread, int>policy, 
const struct sched_param *param); 
A Pthreads system that supports _posix_thread_priority_scheduling must 
provide a definition of the struct sched_param structure that includes at least 
the member sched_priority. The sched_priority member is the only schedul- 
ing parameter used by the standard Pthreads scheduling policies, SCHED_FIFO 
and SCHED_RR. The minimum and maximum priority values (sched_priority 
member) that are allowed for each scheduling policy can be determined by calling 
sched_get_priority_min or sched_get_priority_max, respectively, for the sched- 
uling policy. Pthreads systems that support additional, nonstandard scheduling 
policies may include additional members. 
The sched_fifo {first in, first out) policy allows a thread to run until another 
thread with a higher priority becomes ready, or until it blocks voluntarily. When 
a thread with sched_fifo scheduling policy becomes ready, it begins executing 
immediately unless a thread with equal or higher priority is already executing. 
The sched_rr [round-robin] policy is much the same, except that if a thread 
with sched_rr policy executes for more than a fixed period of time (the timeslice 
interval) without blocking, and another thread with sched_rr or sched_fifo pol- 
icy and the same priority is ready, the running thread will be preempted so the 
ready thread can be executed. 
When threads with sched_fifo or sched_rr policy wait on a condition vari- 
able or wait to lock a mutex, they will be awakened in priority order. That is, if a 
low-priority sched_fifo thread and a high-priority sched_fifo thread are both 
Realtime scheduling 175 
waiting to lock the same mutex, the high-priority thread will always be unblocked 
first when the mutex is unlocked. 
Pthreads defines the name of an additional scheduling policy, called sched_ 
other. Pthreads, however, says nothing at all regarding what this scheduling pol- 
icy does. This is an illustration of an unofficial POSIX philosophy that has been 
termed "a standard way to be nonstandard" (or, alternately, "a portable way to be 
nonportable"). That is, when you use any implementation of Pthreads that sup- 
ports the priority scheduling option, you can write a portable program that 
creates threads running in SCHED_other policy, but the behavior of that program 
is nonportable. (The official explanation of sched_other is that it provides a por- 
table way for a program to declare that it does not need a realtime scheduling 
policy.) 
The schedjdther policy may be an alias for sched_fifo, or it may be sched_rr, 
or it may be something entirely different. The real problem with this ambiguity is 
not that you don't know what sched_other does, but that you have no way of 
knowing what scheduling parameters it might require. Because the meaning of 
SCHED_OTHER is undefined, it does not necessarily use the sched_priority member 
of the struct sched_param structure, and it may require additional, nonstandard 
members that an implementation may add to the structure. If there's any point to 
this, it is simply that sched_other is not portable. If you write any code that uses 
SCHED_OTHER you should be aware that the code is not portable！you are, by defini- 
tion, depending on the sched_other of the particular Pthreads implementation for 
which you wrote the code. 
The schedpolicy and schedparam attributes, set respectively by pthread_ 
attr_setschedpolicy and pthread_attr setschedparam, specify the explicit 
scheduling policy and parameters for the attributes object. Pthreads does not 
specify a default value for either of these attributes, which means that each 
implementation may choose some "appropriate" value. A realtime operating sys- 
tem intended for embedded controller applications, for example, might choose to 
create threads by default with SCHED_fifo policy, and, perhaps, some medium- 
range priority. 
Most multiuser operating systems are more likely to use a nonstandard "time- 
share" scheduling policy by default, causing threads to be scheduled more or less 
as processes have always been scheduled. The system may, for example, tempo- 
rarily reduce the priority of "CPU hogs" so that they cannot prevent other threads 
from making progress. 
One example of a multiuser operating system is Digital UNIX, which supports 
two nonstandard timeshare scheduling policies. The foreground policy (sched_ 
fg_np), which is the default, is used for normal interactive activity, and corre- 
sponds to the way nonthreaded processes are scheduled. The background policy 
(SCHED_BG_NP) can be used for less important support activities. 
When you set the scheduling policy or priority attributes in an 
attributes object,you must also set the inheritsched attribute! 
176 CHAPTER 5 Advanced threaded programming 
The inheritsched attribute, which you can set by calling pthread_attr_ 
setinheritsched, controls whether a thread you create inherits scheduling 
information from the creating thread, or uses the explicit scheduling information 
in the schedpolicy and schedparam attributes. Pthreads does not specify a 
default value for inheritsched, either, so if you care about the policy and schedul- 
ing parameters of your thread, you must always set this attribute. 
Set the inheritsched attribute to pthread_inherit_sched to cause a new 
thread to inherit the scheduling policy and parameters of the creating thread. 
Scheduling inheritance is useful when you're creating "helper" threads that are 
working on behalf of the creator！it generally makes sense for them to run at the 
same policy and priority. Whenever you need to control the scheduling policy or 
parameters of a thread you create, you must set the inheritsched attribute to 
PTHREAD_EXPLICIT_SCHED. 
58-118 The following program, sched_attr.c, shows how to use an attributes object to 
create a thread with an explicit scheduling policy and priority. Notice that it uses 
conditional code to determine whether the priority scheduling feature of Pthreads 
is supported at compilation time. It will print a message if the option is not sup- 
ported and continue, although the program in that case will not do much. (It 
creates a thread with default scheduling behavior, which can only say that it ran.) 
Although Solaris 2.5 defines _posix_thread_priority_scheduling, it does 
not support the POSIX realtime scheduling policies, and attempting to set the 
policy attribute to sched_rr would fail. This program treats Solaris as if it did not 
define the_POSlx_THREAD_PRiORiTY_SCHEDULlNG option. 
| sched_attr.c 
1 #include <unistd.h> 
2 #include <pthread.h> 
3 #include <sched.h> 
4 #include "errors.h" 
5 
6 /* 
7 * Thread start routine. If priority scheduling is supported, 
8 * report the thread's scheduling attributes. 
9 */ 
10 void *thread_routine (void *arg) 
11 { 
12 int my_policy; 
13 struct sched_param my_param; 
14 int status; 
15 
16 /* 
17 * If the priority scheduling option is not defined, then we 
18 * can do nothing with the output of pthread_getschedparam, 
19 * so just report that the thread ran, and exit. 
20 */ 
Realtime scheduling 177 
21 #if defined (_POSIX_THREAD_PRIORITY_SCHEDULING) && Idefined (sun) 
22 status = pthread_getschedparam ( 
23 pthread_self (), &my_policy, &my_param); 
24 if (status != 0) 
25 err_abort (status, "Get sched"); 
26 printf ("thread_routine running at %s/%d\n", 
27 (my_policy == SCHED_FIFO ? "FIFO" 
28 : (my_policy == SCHED_RR ? "RR" 
29 : (my_policy == SCHED_OTHER ? "OTHER" 
30 : "unknown"))), 
31 my_param.sched_priority); 
32 #else 
33 printf ("thread_routine running\n"); 
34 #endif 
35 return NULL; 
36 } 
37 
38 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
39 { 
40 pthread_t thread_id; 
41 pthread_attr_t thread_attr; 
42 int thread_policy; 
43 struct sched_param thread_param; 
44 int status, rr_min_priority, rr_max_priority; 
45 
46 status = pthread_attr_init (&thread_attr); ' 
47 if (status != 0) 
4 8 err_abort (status, "Init attr"); 
49 
50 /* 
51 * If the priority scheduling option is defined, set various 
52 * scheduling parameters. Note that it is particularly important 
53 * that you remember to set the inheritsched attribute to 
54 * PTHREAD_EXPLICIT_SCHED, or the policy and priority that you've 
55 * set will be ignored! The default behavior is to inherit 
56 * scheduling information from the creating thread. 
57 */ 
58 #if defined (_POSIX_THREAD_PRIORITY_SCHEDULING) && Idefined (sun) 
59 status = pthread_attr_getschedpolicy ( 
60 &thread_attr, &thread_policy); 
61 if (status != 0) 
62 err_abort (status, "Get policy"); 
63 status = pthread_attr_getschedparam ( 
64 &thread_attr, &thread_param); 
65 if (status != 0) 
66 err_abort (status, "Get sched param"); 
67 printf ( 
68 "Default policy is %s, priority is %d\n", 
69 (thread_policy == SCHED FIFO ? "FIFO" 
178 CHAPTER 5 Advanced threaded programming 
70 : (thread_policy == SCHED_RR ? "RR" 
71 : (thread_policy == SCHED_OTHER ? "OTHER" 
72 : "unknown"))), 
73 thread_param.sched_priority); 
74 
75 V status = pthread_attr_setschedpolicy ( 
76 &thread_attr, SCHED_RR); 
77 if (status != 0) 
78 printf ("Unable to set SCHED_RR policy.\n"); 
79 else { 
80 /* 
81 * Just for the sake of the exercise, we'll use the 
82 * middle of the priority range allowed for 
83 * SCHED_RR. This should ensure that the thread will be 
84 * run, without blocking everything else. Because any 
85 * assumptions about how a thread's priority interacts 
86 * with other threads (even in other processes) are 
87 * nonportable, especially on an implementation that 
88 * defaults to System contention scope, you may have to 
89 * adjust this code before it will work on some systems. 
90 */ 
91 rr_min_priority = sched_get_priority_min (SCHED_RR); 
92 if (rr_min_priority == -1) 
93 errno_abort ("Get SCHED_RR min priority"); 
94 rr_max_priority = sched_get_priority_max (SCHED_RR); 
95 if (rr_max_priority == -1) 
96 errno_abort ("Get SCHED_RR max priority"); 
97 thread_param.sched_priority = 
98 (rr_min_priority + rr_max_priorityI2; 
99 printf ( 
100 "SCHED_RR priority range is %d to %d: using %d\n", 
101 rr_min_priority, 
102 rr_max_priority, 
103 thread_param.sched_priority); 
104 y status = pthread_attr_setschedparam ( 
105 &thread_attr, &thread_param); 
106 if (status != 0) 
107 err_abort (status, "Set params"); 
108 printf ( 
109 "Creating thread at RR/%d\n", 
110 thread_param.sched_priority); 
111 status = pthread_attr_setinheritsched ( 
112 &thread_attr, PTHREAD_EXPLICIT_SCHED); 
113 if (status != 0) 
114 err_abort (status, "Set inherit"); 
115 } 
116 #else 
117 printf ("Priority scheduling not supported\n"); 
Realtime scheduling 179 
118 #endif 
119 status = pthread_create ( 
120 &thread_id, &thread_attr, thread_routine, NULL); 
121 if (status != 0) 
122 err_abort (status, "Create thread"); 
123 status = pthread_join (thread_id, NULL); 
124 if (status != 0) 
125 err_abort (status, "Join thread"); 
126 printf ("Main exitingW); 
127 return 0; 
128 } 
| sched_attr.c 
The next program, sched_thread.c, shows how to modify the realtime sched- 
uling policy and parameters for a running thread. When changing the scheduling 
policy and parameters in a thread attributes object, remember, you use two sepa- 
rate operations: one to modify the scheduling policy and the other to modify the 
scheduling parameters. 
You cannot modify the scheduling policy of a running thread separately from 
the thread's parameters, because the policy and parameters must always be con- 
sistent for scheduling to operate correctly. Each scheduling policy may have a 
unique range of valid scheduling priorities, and a thread cannot operate at a pri- 
ority that isn't valid for its current policy. To ensure consistency of the policy and 
parameters, they are set with a single call. 
55 Unlike sched_attr.c, sched_thread.c does not check the compile-time fea- 
ture macro _posix_thread_priority_scheduling. That means it will probably 
not compile, and almost certainly won't run correctly, on a system that does not 
support the option. There's nothing wrong with writing a program that way！in 
fact, that's what you are likely to do most of the time. If you need priority sched- 
uling, you would document that your application requires the _POSIX_thread_ 
priority_scheduling option, and use it. 
57-62 Solaris 2.5, despite denning _posix_thread_priority_scheduling, does not 
support realtime scheduling policies. For this reason, the ENOSYS from sched_ 
get_priority_min is handled as a special case. 
| sched_thread.c 
1 #include <unistd.h> 
2 #include <pthread.h> 
3 #include <sched.h> 
4 #include "errors.h" 
5 
6 #define THREADS 5 
7 
8 /* 
9 * Structure describing each thread. 
10 */ 
180 CHAPTER 5 Advanced threaded programming 
11 typedef struct thread_tag { 
12 int index; 
13 pthread_t id; 
14 } thread_t; 
15 
16 thread_t threads[THREADS]; 
17 int rr_min_priority; 
18 
19 /* 
20 * Thread start routine that will set its own priority. 
21 */ 
22 void *thread_routine (void *arg) 
23 { 
24 thread_t *self = (thread_t*)arg; 
25 int my_policy; 
26 struct sched_param my_param; 
27 int status; 
28 
29 my_param.sched_priority = rr_min_priority + self->index; 
30 DPRINTF (( 
31 "Thread %d will set SCHED_FIFO, priority %d\n", 
32 self->index, my_param.sched_priority)); 
33 status = pthread_setschedparam ( 
34 self->id, SCHED_RR, &my_param); o'-, ;|' - |- . 
35 if (status != 0) V ?--"|' ( 
36 err_abort (status, "Set sched"); 
37 status = pthread_getschedparam ( 
38 self->id, &my_policy, &my_param); 
39 if (status != 0) 
40 err_abort (status, "Get sched"); 
41 'printf ("thread_routine %d running at %s/%d\n", 
42 self->index, 
43 (my_policy == SCHED_FIFO ? "FIFO" 
44 : (my_policy == SCHED_RR ? "RR" 
45 : (my_policy == SCHED_OTHER ? "OTHER" 
4 6 : "unknown"))), 
47 my_param.sched_priority); 
48 return NULL; 
49 } 
50 
51 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
52 { 
53 int count, status; 
54 
55 rr_min_priority = sched_get_priority_min (SCHED_RR); 
56 if (rr_min_priority == -1) { 
57 #ifdef sun 
58 if (errno == ENOSYS) { 
59 fprintf (stderr, "SCHED_RR is not supported.\n"); 
Realtime scheduling 181 
60 exit @); 
61 } 
62 #endif 
63 errno_abort ("Get SCHED_RR min priority"); 
64 } 
65 for (count = 0; count < THREADS; count++) { 
66 threads[count].index = count; 
67 status = pthread_create ( 
68 Sthreadsfcount].id, NULL, 
69 thread_routine, (void*)&threads[count]); 
70 if (status != 0) 
71 err_abort (status, "Create thread"); 
72 } 
73 for (count = 0; count < THREADS; count++) { 
74 status = pthread_join (threads[count].id, NULL); 
75 if (status != 0) 
76 err_abort (status, "Join thread"); 
77 } 
78 printf ("Main exiting\n"); 
79 return 0; 
80 } 
| sched thread.c 
5.5.3 Contention scope and allocation domain 
int pthread_attr_getscope ( 
const pthread_attr_t *attr, int *contentionscope); 
int pthread_attr_setscope ( 
pthread attr t *attr, int contentionscope); 
Besides scheduling policy and parameters, two other controls are important in 
realtime scheduling. Unless you are writing a realtime application, they probably 
don't matter. If you are writing a realtime application, you will need to find out 
which settings of these controls are supported by a system. 
The first control is called contention scope. It is a description of how your 
threads compete for processor resources. System contention scope means that 
your thread competes for processor resources against threads outside your pro- 
cess. A high-priority system contention scope thread in your process can keep 
system contention scope threads in other processes from running (or vice versa). 
Process contention scope means that your threads compete only among them- 
selves. Usually, process contention scope means that the operating system 
chooses a process to execute, possibly using only the traditional UNIX priority, 
and some additional scheduler within the process applies the POSIX scheduling 
rules to determine which thread to execute. 
182 CHAPTER 5 Advanced threaded programming 
Pthreads provides the thread scope attribute so that you can specify whether 
each thread you create should have process or system contention scope. A 
Pthreads system may choose to support pthread_scope_process, pthread_ 
scope_system, or both. If you try to create a thread with a scope that is not sup- 
ported by the system, pthread_attr_setscope will return ENOTSUP. 
The second control is allocation domain. An allocation domain is the set of pro- 
cessors within the system for which threads may compete. A system may have 
one or more allocation domains, each containing one or more processors. In a 
uniprocessor system, an allocation domain will contain only one processor, but 
you may still have more than one allocation domain. On a multiprocessor, each 
allocation domain may contain from one processor to the number of processors 
in the system. 
There is no Pthreads interface to set a thread's allocation domain. The 
POSIX. 14 (Multiprocessor Profile) working group considered proposing standard 
interfaces, but the effort was halted by the prospect of dealing with the wide 
range of hardware architectures and existing software interfaces. Despite the 
lack of a standard, any system supporting multiprocessors will have interfaces to 
affect the allocation domain of a thread. 
Because there is no standard interface to control allocation domain, there is 
no way to describe precisely all the effects of any particular hypothetical situa- 
tion. Still, you may need to be concerned about these things if you use a system 
that supports multiprocessors. A few things to think about: 
1. How do system contention scope threads and process contention scope 
threads, within the same allocation domain, interact with each other? They 
are competing for resources in some manner, but the behavior is not 
denned by the standard. 
2. If the system supports "overlapping" allocation domains, in other words, if 
a processor can appear in more than one allocation domain within the sys- 
tem, and you have one system contention scope thread in each of two 
overlapping allocation domains, what happens? 
I System contention scope is predictable. 
Process contention scope is cheap. 
On most systems, you will get better performance, and lower cost, by using 
only process contention scope. Context switches between system contention 
scope threads usually require at least one call into the kernel, and those calls are 
relatively expensive compared to the cost of saving and restoring thread state in 
user mode. Each system contention scope thread will be permanently associated 
with one "kernel entity," and the number of kernel entities is usually more limited 
than the number of Pthreads threads. Process contention scope threads may 
share one kernel entity, or some small number of kernel entities. On a given sys- 
tem configuration, for example, you may be able to create thousands of process 
contention scope threads, but only hundreds of system contention scope threads. 
Realtime scheduling 183 
On the other hand, process contention scope gives you no real control over the 
scheduling priority of your thread！while a high priority may give it precedence 
over other threads in the process, it has no advantage over threads in other pro- 
cesses with lower priority. System contention scope gives you better predictability 
by allowing control, often to the extent of being able to make your thread "more 
important" than threads running within the operating system kernel. 
I System contention scope is less predictable with an allocation domain 
greater than one. 
When a thread is assigned to an allocation domain with more than a single 
processor, the application can no longer rely on completely predictable schedul- 
ing behavior. Both high- and low-priority threads may run at the same time, for 
example, because the scheduler will not allow processors to be idle just because a 
high-priority thread is running. The uniprocessor behavior would make little 
sense on a multiprocessor. 
When thread 1 awakens thread 2 by unlocking a mutex, and thread 2 has a 
higher priority than thread 1, thread 2 will preempt thread 1 and begin running 
immediately. However, if thread 1 and thread 2 are running simultaneously in an 
allocation domain greater than one, and thread 1 awakens thread 3, which has 
lower priority than thread 1 but higher priority than thread 2, thread 3 may not 
immediately preempt thread 2. Thread 3 may remain ready until thread 2 blocks. 
For some applications, the predictability afforded by guaranteed preemption 
in the case outlined in the previous paragraph may be important. In most cases, 
it is not that important as long as thread 3 will eventually run. Although POSIX 
does not require any Pthreads system to implement this type of "cross processor 
preemption," you are more likely to find it when you use system contention scope 
threads. If predictability is critical, of course, you should be using system conten- 
tion scope anyway. 
5.5.4 Problems with realtime scheduling 
One of the problems of relying on realtime scheduling is that it is not modu- 
lar. In real applications you will generally be working with libraries from a variety 
of sources, and those libraries may rely on threads for important functions like 
network communication and resource management. Now, it may seem reason- 
able to make "the most important thread" in your library run with sched_fifo 
policy and maximum priority. The resulting thread, however, isn't just the most 
important thread for your library！it is (or, at least, behaves as) the most impor- 
tant thread in the entire process, including the main program and any other 
libraries. Your high-priority thread may prevent all other libraries, and in some 
cases even the operating system, from performing work on which the application 
relies. 
184 CHAPTER 5 Advanced threaded programming 
Another problem, which really isn't a problem with priority scheduling, but 
with the way many people think about priority scheduling, is that it doesn't do 
what many people expect. Many people think that "realtime priority" threads 
somehow "go faster" than other threads, and that's not true. Realtime priority 
threads may actually go slower, because there is more overhead involved in mak- 
ing all of the required preemption checks at all the right times！especially on a 
multiprocessor. 
A more severe problem with fixed priority scheduling is called priority inver- 
sion. Priority inversion is when a low-priority thread can prevent a high-priority 
thread from running！a nasty interaction between scheduling and synchroniza- 
tion. Scheduling rules state that one thread should run, but synchronization 
requires that another thread run, so that the priorities of the two threads appear 
to be reversed. 
Priority inversion occurs when low-priority thread acquires a shared resource 
(such as a mutex), and is preempted by a high-priority thread that then blocks on 
that same resource. With only two threads, the low-priority thread would then be 
allowed to run, eventually (we assume) releasing the mutex. However, if a third 
thread with a priority between those two is ready to run, it can prevent the low- 
priority thread from running. Because the low-priority thread holds the mutex 
that the high-priority thread needs, the middle-priority thread is also keeping the 
higher-priority thread from running. 
There are a number of ways to prevent priority inversion. The simplest is to 
avoid using realtime scheduling, but that's not always practical. Pthreads pro- 
vides several mutex locking protocols that help avoid priority inversion, priority 
ceiling and priority inheritance. These are discussed in Section 5.5.5. 
I Most threaded programs do not need realtime scheduling. 
A final problem is that priority scheduling isn't completely portable. Pthreads 
defines the priority scheduling features under an option, and many implementa- 
tions that are not primarily intended for realtime programming may choose not to 
support the option. Even if the option is supported, there are many important 
aspects of priority scheduling that are not covered by the standard. When you 
use system contention scope, for example, where your threads may compete 
directly against threads within the operating system, setting a high priority on 
your threads might prevent kernel I/O drivers from functioning on some systems. 
Pthreads does not specify a thread's default scheduling policy or priority, or 
how the standard scheduling policies interact with nonstandard policies. So 
when you set the scheduling policy and priority of your thread, using "portable" 
interfaces, the standard provides no way to predict how that setting will affect 
any other threads in the process or the system itself. 
If you really need priority scheduling, then use it！and be aware that it has 
special requirements beyond simply Pthreads. If you need priority scheduling, 
keep the following in mind: 
Realtime scheduling 
185 
1. Process contention scope is "nicer" than system contention scope, because 
you will not prevent a thread in another process, or in the kernel, from 
running. 
2. sched_rr is "nicer" than sched_fifo, and slightly more portable, because 
SCHED_rr threads will be preempted at intervals to share the available pro- 
cessor time with other threads at the same priority. 
3. Lower priorities for sched_fifo and sched_rr policies are nicer than 
higher priorities, because you are less likely to interfere with something 
else that's important. 
Unless your code really needs priority scheduling, avoid it. In most cases, 
introducing priority scheduling will cause more problems than it will solve. 
5.5.5 Priority-aware mutexes 
#if defined (_POSIX_THREAD_PRIO_PROTECT) \ 
|| defined (_POSIX_THREAD_PRIO_INHERIT) 
int pthread_mutexattr_getprotocol ( 
const pthread_mutexattr_t *attr, int *protocol); 
int pthread_mutexattr_setprotocol ( 
pthread_mutexattr_t *attr, int protocol); 
#endif 
#ifdef _POSIX_THREAD_PRIO_PROTECT 
int pthread_mutexattr_getprioceiling ( 
const pthread_attr_t *attr, int *prioceiling); 
int pthread_rautexattr_setprioceiling ( 
pthread_mutexattr_t *attr, int prioceiling); 
int pthread_mutex_getprioceiling ( 
const pthread_mutex_t *mutex, int *prioceiling); 
int pthread_mutex_setprioceiling ( 
pthread_mutex_t *mutex, 
int prioceiling, int *old_ceiling); 
#endif 
Pthreads provides several special mutex attributes that can help to avoid pri- 
ority inversion deadlocks. Locking, or waiting for, a mutex with one of these 
attributes may change the priority of the thread！or the priority of other threads！ 
to ensure that the thread that owns the mutex cannot be preempted by another 
thread that needs to lock the same mutex. 
These mutex attributes may not be supported by your implementation of 
Pthreads, because they are optional features. If your code needs to function with 
or without these options, you can conditionally compile references based on the 
feature test macros _posix_thread_prio_protect or _posix_thread_prio_ 
inherit, defined in <unistd.h>, or you can call sysconf during program execu- 
tion to check for SC THREAD PRIO PROTECT or SC THREAD PRIO INHERIT. 
186 CHAPTER 5 Advanced threaded programming 
Once you've created a mutex using one of these attributes, you can lock and 
unlock the mutex exactly like any other mutex. As a consequence, you can easily 
convert any mutex you create by changing the code that initializes the mutex. 
(You must call pthread_mutex_init, however, because you cannot statically ini- 
tialize a mutex with nondefault attributes.) 
I "Priority ceiling" protocol means that while a thread owns the mutex, it 
runs at the specified priority. 
If your system defines _posix_thread_prio_protect then it supports the 
protocol and prioceiling attributes. You set the protocol attribute by calling 
pthread_mutexattr_setprotocol. If you set the protocol attribute to the value 
pthread_prio_protect, then you can also specify the priority ceiling for mutexes 
created using the attributes object by setting the prioceiling attribute. 
You set the prioceiling attribute by calling the function pthread_mutexattr_ 
setprioceiling. When any thread locks a mutex defined with such an attributes 
object, the thread's priority will be set to the priority ceiling of the mutex, unless 
the thread's priority is already the same or higher. Note that locking the mutex in 
a thread running at a priority above the priority ceiling of the mutex breaks the 
protocol, removing the protection against priority inversion. 
I "Priority inheritance" means that when a thread waits on a mutex 
owned by a lower-priority thread, the priority of the owner is increased 
to that of the waiter. 
If your system defines _posix_thread_prio_inherit then it supports the pro- 
tocol attribute. If you set the protocol attribute to the value pthread_prio_ 
inherit, then no thread holding the mutex can be preempted by another thread 
with a priority lower than that of any thread waiting for the mutex. When any 
thread attempts to lock the mutex while a lower-priority thread holds the mutex, 
the priority of the thread currently holding the mutex will be raised to the priority 
of the waiter as long as it owns the mutex. 
If your system does not define either _posix_thread_prio_protect or _posix_ 
thread_prio_inherit then the protocol attribute may not be defined. The default 
value of the protocol attribute (or the effective value if the attribute isn't defined) is 
posix_prio_none, which means that thread priorities are not modified by the act 
of locking (or waiting for) a mutex. 
5.5.5.1 Priority ceiling mutexes 
The simplest of the two types of "priority aware" mutexes is the priority ceiling 
(or "priority protection") protocol (Figure 5.3). When you create a mutex using a 
priority ceiling, you specify the highest priority at which a thread will ever be 
running when it locks the mutex. Any thread locking that mutex will have its 
Realtime scheduling 
187 
priority 
time 
|！ lock mutex 
！ unlock mutex 
priority ceiling 
FIGURE 5.3 Priority ceiling mutex operation 
priority automatically raised to that value, which will allow it to finish with the 
mutex before it can be preempted by any other thread that might try to lock the 
mutex. You can also examine or modify the priority ceiling of a mutex that was 
created with the priority ceiling [protect) protocol. 
A priority ceiling mutex is not useful within a library that can be called by 
threads you don't control. If any thread that is running at a priority above the 
ceiling locks the priority ceiling mutex, the protocol is broken. This doesn't neces- 
sarily guarantee a priority inversion, but it removes all protection against priority 
inversion. Since the priority ceiling protocol adds overhead to each mutex opera- 
tion compared to a normal "unprotected" mutex, you may have wasted processor 
time accomplishing nothing. 
Priority ceiling is perfect for an embedded realtime application where the devel- 
opers control all synchronization within the system. The priority ceiling can be 
safely determined when the code is designed, and you can avoid priority inversion 
with a relatively small cost in performance compared to more general solutions. Of 
course it is always most efficient to avoid priority inversion, either by avoiding pri- 
ority scheduling or by using any given mutex only within threads of equal priority. 
Equally, of course, these alternatives rarely prove practical when you need them 
most. 
You can use priority ceiling within almost any main program, even when you 
don't control the code in libraries you use. That's because while it is common for 
threads that call into library functions to lock library mutexes, it is not common 
for threads created by a library to call into application code and lock application 
mutexes. If you use a library that has "callbacks" into your code, you must either 
ensure that those callbacks (and any functions they call) don't use the priority 
ceiling mutexes or that no thread in which the callback might be invoked will run 
at a priority above the ceiling priority of the mutex. 
188 
CHAPTER 5 Advanced threaded programming 
5.5.5.2 Priority inheritance mutexes 
The other Pthreads mutex protocol is priority inheritance. In the priority inher- 
itance protocol, when a thread locks a mutex the thread's priority is controlled 
through the mutex (Figure 5.4). When another thread needs to block on thai 
mutex, it looks at the priority of the thread that owns the mutex. If the thread 
that owns the mutex has a lower priority than the thread attempting to block on 
the mutex, the priority of the owner is raised to the priority of the blocking 
thread. 
The priority increase ensures that the thread that has the mutex locked can- 
not be preempted unless the waiting thread would also have been preempted！in 
a sense, the thread owning the mutex is working on behalf of the higher-priority 
thread. When the thread unlocks the mutex, the thread's priority is automatically 
lowered to its normal priority and the highest-priority waiter is awakened. If a 
second thread of even higher priority blocks on the mutex, the thread that has 
the mutex blocked will again have its priority increased. The thread will still be 
returned to its original priority when the mutex is unlocked. 
The priority inheritance protocol is more general and powerful than priority 
celling, but also more complicated and expensive. If a library package must make 
use of priority scheduling, and cannot avoid use of a mutex from threads of differ- 
ent priority, then priority inheritance is the only currently available solution. If 
you are writing a main program, and know that none of your mutexes can be 
locked by threads created within a library, then priority ceiling will accomplish 
the same result as priority inheritance, and with less overhead. 
thread 1 
locks mi 
i 
priority 
atex 
r 
time 
thread 2 b 
f~ waiting foi 
locks 
mutex 
thread 1 
unlocks mutex 
thread 1 priority | 
thread 2 priority | 
FIGURE 5.4 Priority inheritance mutex operation 
Threads and kernel entities 189 
5.6 Threads and kernel entities 
"Two lines!" cried the Mock Turtle. "Seals, turtles, salmon, and so on: 
then, when you've cleared all the jelly-fish out of the way！" 
'That generally takes some time," interrupted the Gryphon. 
"！you advance twice！" 
"Each with a lobster as a partner!" cried the Gryphon. 
！Lewis Carroll, Alice's Adventures in Wonderland 
Pthreads deliberately says very little about implementation details. This leaves 
each vendor free to make decisions based on the needs of their users and to allow 
the state of the art to advance by permitting innovation. The standard places a 
few essential requirements on the implementation！enough that you can write 
strictly conforming POSIX applications that do useful work with threads and will 
be able to run correctly on all conforming implementations of the standard. 
Any Pthreads implementation must ensure that "system services invoked by 
one thread do not suspend other threads" so that you do not need to worry that 
calling read might block all threads in the process on some systems. On the other 
hand, this does not mean that your process will always have the maximum possi- 
ble level of concurrency. 
Nevertheless, when using a system it is often useful to understand the ways in 
which the system may be implemented. When writing ANSI C expressions, for 
example, it is often helpful to understand what the code generator, and even the 
hardware, will do with those expressions. With that in mind, the following sec- 
tions describe, briefly, a few of the main variations you're likely to encounter. 
The important terms used in these sections are "Pthreads thread," "kernel 
entity," and "processor." "Pthreads thread" means a thread that you created by 
calling pthread_create, represented by an identifier of type pthread_t. These 
are the threads that you control using Pthreads interfaces. By "processor," I refer 
to the physical hardware, the particular thing of which a "multiprocessor" has 
more than one. 
Most operating systems have at least one additional level of abstraction 
between "Pthreads thread" and "processor" and I refer to that as a "kernel entity," 
because that is the term used by Pthreads. In some systems, "kernel entity" may 
be a traditional UNIX process. It may be a Digital UNIX Mach thread, or a Solaris 
2.x LWP, or an IRIX sproc process. The exact meaning of "kernel entity," and how 
it interacts with the Pthreads thread, is the crucial difference between the three 
models described in the following sections. 
* Strictly conforming is used by POSIX to mean something quite specific: a strictly conforming 
application is one that does not rely on any options or extensions to the standard and requires 
only the specified minimum value for all implementation limits (but will work correctly with any 
allowed value). 
190 CHAPTER 5 Advanced threaded programming 
5.6.1 Many-to-one (user level) 
The many-to-one method is also sometimes called a "library implementation." 
In general, "many-to-one" implementations are designed for operating systems 
with no support for threads. Pthreads implementations that run on generic UNIX 
kernels usually fall into this category！for example, the classic DCE threads ref- 
erence implementation, or the SunOS 4.x LWP package (no relation to the Solaris 
2.x LWP, which is a kernel entity). 
Many-to-one implementations cannot take advantage of parallelism on a mul- 
tiprocessor, and any blocking system service, for example, a call to read, will 
block all threads in the process. Some implementations may help you avoid this 
problem by using features such as UNIX nonblocking I/O, or POSIX. lb asyn- 
chronous I/O, where available. However, these features have limitations; for 
example, not all device drivers support nonblocking I/O, and traditional UNIX 
disk file system response is usually considered "instantaneous" and will ignore 
the nonblocking I/O mode. 
Some many-to-one implementations may not be tightly integrated with the 
ANSI C library's support functions, and that can cause serious trouble. The stdio 
functions, for example, might block the entire process (and all threads) while one 
thread waits for you to enter a command. Any many-to-one implementation that 
conforms to the Pthreads standard, however, has gotten around these problems, 
perhaps by including a special version of stdio and other functions. 
When you require concurrency but do not need parallelism, a many-to-one 
implementation may provide the best thread creation performance, as well as the 
best context switch performance for voluntary blocking using mutexes and con- 
dition variables. It is fast because the Pthreads library saves and restores thread 
context entirely in user mode. You can, for example, create a lot of threads and 
block most of them on condition variables (waiting for some external event) very 
quickly, without involving the kernel at all. 
Figure 5.5 shows the mapping of Pthreads threads (left column) to the kernel 
entity (middle column), which is a process, to physical processors (right column). 
In this case, the process has four Pthreads threads, labeled "Pthread 1" through 
"Pthread 4." The Pthreads library schedules the four threads onto the single pro- 
cess in user mode by swapping register state (SP, general registers, and so forth). 
The library may use a timer to preempt a Pthreads thread that runs too long. The 
kernel schedules the process onto one of the two physical processors, labeled 
"processor 1" and "processor 2." The important characteristics of this model are 
shown in Table 5.2. 
Threads and kernel entities 
191 
Pthread 1 
Pthread 2 
Pthread 3 
kernel entity 1 
processor 1 
Pthread 4 
processor 2 
FIGURE 5.5 Many-to-one thread mapping 
Advantages 
Fastest context switch time. 
Simple; the implementation 
may even be (mostly) portable.* 
Disadvantages 
Potentially long latency during system service blocking. 
Single-process applications cannot take advantage of 
multiprocessor hardware. 
* The DCE threads user-mode scheduler can usually be ported to new operating systems in a few 
days, involving primarily new assembly language for the register context switching routines. We use 
the motto "Some Assembly Required." 
TABLE 5.2 Many-to-one thread scheduling 
5.6.2 One-to-one (kernel level) 
One-to-one thread mapping is also sometimes called a "kernel thread" imple- 
mentation. The Pthreads library assigns each thread to a kernel entity. It 
generally must use blocking kernel functions to wait on mutexes and condition 
variables. While synchronization may occur either within the kernel or in user 
mode, thread scheduling occurs within the kernel. 
Pthreads threads can take full advantage of multiprocessor hardware in a 
one-to-one implementation without any extra effort on your part, for example, 
separating your code into multiple processes. When a thread blocks in the kernel, 
192 CHAPTER 5 Advanced threaded programming 
it does not affect other threads any more than the blocking of a normal UNIX pro- 
cess affects other processes. One thread can even process a page fault without 
affecting other threads. 
One-to-one implemenations suffer from two main problems. The first is that 
they do not scale well. That is, each thread in your application is a kernel entity. 
Because kernel memory is precious, kernel objects such as processes and 
threads are often limited by preallocated arrays, and most implementations will 
limit the number of threads you can create. It will also limit the number of 
threads that can be created on the entire system！so depending on what other 
processes are doing, your process may not be able to reach its own limit. 
The second problem is that blocking on a mutex and waiting on a condition 
variable, which happen frequently in many applications, are substantially more 
expensive on most one-to-one implementations, because they require entering 
the machine's protected kernel mode. Note that locking a mutex, when it was not 
already locked, or unlocking a mutex, when there are no waiting threads, may be 
no more expensive than on a many-to-one implementation, because on most sys- 
tems those functions can be completed in user mode. 
A one-to-one implementation can be a good choice for CPU-bound applica- 
tions, which don't block very often. Many high-performance parallel applications 
begin by creating a worker thread for each physical processor in the system, and. 
once started, the threads run independently for a substantial time period. Such 
applications will work well because they do not strain the kernel by creating a lot 
of threads, and they don't require a lot of calls into the kernel to block and 
unblock their threads. 
Figure 5.6 shows the mapping of Pthreads threads (left column) to kernel enti- 
ties (middle column) to physical processors (right column). In this case, the 
process has four Pthreads threads, labeled "Pthread 1" through "Pthread 4." 
Each Pthreads thread is permanently bound to the corresponding kernel entity. 
The kernel schedules the four kernel entities (along with those from other pro- 
cesses) onto the two physical processors, labeled "processor 1" and "processor 2." 
The important characteristics of this model are shown in Table 5.3. 
Threads and kernel entities 
193 
Pthread 1 
Pthread 2 
Pthread 3 
Pthread 4 
P > 
I > 
jg > 
i >| 
kernel entity 1 
kernel entity 2 
kernel entity 3 
kernel entity 4 
1 
processor 1 | 
processor 2 m 
FIGURE 5.6 One-to-one thread mapping 
Advantages 
Can take advantage of 
multiprocessor hard- 
ware within a single 
process. 
No latency during sys- 
tem service blocking. 
Disadvantages 
Relatively slow thread context switch (calls into 
kernel). 
Poor scaling when many threads are used, because 
each Pthreads thread takes kernel resources from 
the system. 
TABLE 5.3 One-to-one thread scheduling 
5.6.3 Many-to-few (two level) 
The many-to-few model tries to merge the advantages of both the many-to- 
one and one-to-one models, while avoiding their disadvantages. This model 
requires cooperation between the user-level Pthreads library and the kernel. 
They share scheduling responsibilities and may communicate information about 
the threads between each other. 
194 
CHAPTER 5 Advanced threaded programming 
When the Pthreads library needs to switch between two threads, it can do so 
directly, in user mode. The new Pthreads thread runs on the same kernel entity 
without intervention from the kernel. This gains the performance benefit of 
many-to-one implementations for the most common cases, when a thread blocks 
on a mutex or condition variable, and when a thread terminates. 
When the kernel needs to block a thread, to wait for an I/O or other resource, 
it does so. The kernel may inform the Pthreads library, as in Digital UNIX 4.0, so 
that the library can preserve process concurrency by immediately scheduling a 
new Pthreads thread, somewhat like the original "scheduler activations" model 
proposed by the famous University of Washington research [Anderson, 1991]. Or. 
the kernel may simply block the kernel entity, in which case it may allow pro- 
grammers to increase the number of kernel entities that are allocated to the 
process, as in Solaris 2.5！otherwise the process could be stalled when all kernel 
entities have blocked, even though other user threads are ready to run. 
Many-to-few implementations excel in most real-world applications, because 
in most applications, threads perform a mixture of CPU-bound and I/O-bound 
operations, and block both in I/O and in Pthreads synchronization. Most applica- 
tions also create more threads than there are physical processors, either directly 
or because an application that creates a few threads also uses a parallel library 
that creates a few threads, and so forth. 
Figure 5.7 shows the mapping of Pthreads threads (left column) to kernel enti- 
ties (middle column) to physical processors (right column). In this case, the 
process has four Pthreads threads, labeled "Pthread 1" through "Pthread 4." The 
Pthreads library creates some number of kernel entities at initialization (and may 
create more later). Typically, the library will start with one kernel entity (labeled 
"kernel entity 1" and "kernel entity 2") for each physical processor. The kernel 
schedules these kernel entities (along with those from other processes) onto the 
Pthread 1 
Pthread 2 
Pthread 3 
Pthread 4 
/ 
kernel entity 1 
kernel entity 2 
processor 1 
processor 2 
FIGURE 5.7 Many-to-few thread mapping 
Threads and kernel entities 
195 
two physical processors, labeled "processor 1" and "processor 2." The important 
characteristics of this model are shown in Table 5.4. 
Advantages 
Can take advantage of multiprocessor 
hardware within a process. 
Most context switches are in user mode 
(fast). 
Scales well; a process may use one ker- 
nel entity per physical processor, or "a 
few" more. 
Little latency during system service 
blocking. 
Disadvantages 
More complicated than other models. 
Programmers lose direct control over 
kernel entities, since the thread's pri- 
ority may be meaningful only in user 
mode. 
TABLE 5.4 Many-to-jew thread scheduling 
6 POSIX adjusts to threads 
"Who are you ?" said the Caterpillar. 
This was not an encouraging opening for a conversation. 
Alice replied, rather shyly, "I！/ hardly know, Sir, 
lust at present！at least I know who I was when / got up this morning, but 
I think I must have been changed several times since then." 
！Lewis Carroll, Alice's Adventures in Wonderland 
Pthreads changes the meaning of a number of traditional POSIX process func- 
tions. Most of the changes are obvious, and you'd probably expect them even if 
the standard hadn't added specific wording. When a thread blocks for I/O, for 
example, only the calling thread blocks, while other threads in the process can 
continue to run. 
But there's another class of POSIX functions that doesn't extend into the 
threaded world quite so unambiguously. For example, when you fork a threaded 
process, what happens to the threads? What does exec do in a threaded process? 
What happens when one of the threads in a threaded process calls exit? 
6.1 fork 
I Avoid using fork in a threaded program (if you can) 
unless you intend to exec a new program immediately. 
When a threaded process calls fork to create a child process, Pthreads speci- 
fies that only the thread calling fork exists in the child. Although only the calling 
thread exists on return from fork in the child process, all other Pthreads states 
remain as they were at the time of the call to fork. In the child process, the 
thread has the same thread state as in the parent. It owns the same mutexes, has 
the same value for all thread-specific data keys, and so forth. All mutexes and 
condition variables exist, although any threads that were waiting on a synchroni- 
zation object at the time of the fork are no longer waiting. (They don't exist in the 
child process, so how could they be waiting?) 
Pthreads does not "terminate" the other threads in a forked process, as if they 
exited with pthread_exit or even as if they were canceled. They simply cease to 
exist. That is, the threads do not run thread-specific data destructors or cleanup 
handlers. This is not a problem if the child process is about to call exec to run a 
197 
198 CHAPTER 6 POSIX adjusts to threads 
new program, but if you use fork to clone a threaded program, beware that you 
may lose access to memory, especially heap memory stored only as thread- 
specific data values. 
I The state of mutexes is not affected by a fork. If it was locked in the 
parent it is locked in the child! 
If a mutex was locked at the time of the call to fork, then it is still locked in 
the child. Because a locked mutex is owned by the thread that locked it, the 
mutex can be unlocked in the child only if the thread that locked the mutex was 
the one that called fork. This is important to remember！if another thread has a 
mutex locked when you call fork, you will lose access to that mutex and any data 
controlled by that mutex. 
Despite the complications, you can fork a child that continues running and 
even continues to use Pthreads. You must use fork handlers carefully to protect 
your mutexes and the shared data that the mutexes are protecting. Fork han- 
dlers are described in Section 6.1.1. 
Because thread-specific data destructors and cleanup handlers are not called, 
you may need to worry about memory leaks. One possible solution would be to 
cancel threads created by your subsystem in the prepare fork handler, and wait 
for them to terminate before allowing the fork to continue (by returning), and 
then create new threads in the parent handler that is called after fork completes. 
This could easily become messy, and I am not recommending it as a solution. 
Instead, take another look at the warning back at the beginning of this section: 
Avoid using fork in threaded code except where the child process will immedi- 
ately exec a new program. 
POSIX specifies a small set of functions that may be called safely from within 
signal-catching functions ("async-signal safe" functions), and fork is one of them. 
However, none of the POSIX threads functions is async-signal safe (and there are 
good reasons for this, because being async-signal safe generally makes a function 
substantially more expensive). With the introduction of fork handlers, however, a 
call to fork is also a call to some set of fork handlers. 
The purpose of a fork handler is to allow threaded code to protect synchroni- 
zation state and data invariants across a fork, and in most cases that requires 
locking mutexes. But you cannot lock mutexes from a signal-catching function. 
So while it is legal to call fork from within a signal-catching function, doing so 
may (beyond the control or knowledge of the caller) require performing other 
operations that cannot be performed within a signal-catching function. 
This is an inconsistency in the POSIX standard that will need to be fixed. 
Nobody yet knows what the eventual solution will be. My advice is to avoid using 
fork in a signal-catching function. 
fork 199 
6.1.1 Fork handlers 
int pthread_atfork (void (*prepare)(void), I 
void (*parent)(void), void (*child)(void)); I 
Pthreads added the pthread_atf ork "fork handler" mechanism to allow your 
code to protect data invariants across fork. This is somewhat analogous to 
atexit, which allows a program to perform cleanup when a process terminates. 
With pthread_atf ork you supply three separate handler addresses. The prepare 
fork handler is called before the fork takes place in the parent process. The parent 
fork handler is called after the fork in the parent process, and the child fork han- 
dler is called after the fork in the child process. 
I If you write a subsystem that uses mutexes and does not establish 
I fork handlers, then that subsystem will not function correctly in a 
I child process after a fork. 
Normally a prepare fork handler locks all mutexes used by the associated code 
(for a library or an application) in the correct order to prevent deadlocks. The 
thread calling fork will block in the prepare fork handler until it has locked all the 
mutexes. That ensures that no other threads can have the mutexes locked or be 
modifying data that the child might need. The parent fork handler need only 
unlock all of those mutexes, allowing the parent process and all threads to con- 
tinue normally. 
The child fork handler may often be the same as the parent fork handler; but 
sometimes you'll need to reset the program or library state. For example, if you 
use "daemon" threads to perform functions in the background you'll need to either 
record the fact that those threads no longer exist or create new threads to per- 
form the same function in the child. You may need to reset counters, free heap 
memory, and so forth. 
I Your fork handlers are only as good as everyone else's fork handlers. 
The system will run all prepare fork handlers declared in the process when 
any thread calls fork. If you code your prepare and child fork handlers correctly 
then, in principle, you will be able to continue operating in the child process. But 
what if someone else didn't supply fork handlers or didn't do it right? The ANSI C 
library on a threaded system, for example, must use a set of mutexes to synchro- 
nize internal data, such as stdio file streams. 
If you use an ANSI C library that doesn't supply fork handlers to prepare those 
mutexes properly for a fork, for example, then, sometimes, you may find that 
200 CHAPTER 6 POSIX adjusts to threads 
your child process hangs when it calls printf, because another thread in the 
parent process had the mutex locked when your thread called fork. There's often 
nothing you can do about this type of problem except to file a problem report 
against the system. These mutexes are usually private to the library, and aren't 
visible to your code！you can't lock them in your prepare handler or before calling 
fork. 
The program atfork.c shows the use of fork handlers. When run with no 
argument, or with a nonzero argument, the program will install fork handlers. 
When run with a zero argument, such as atf ork 0, it will not. 
With fork handlers installed, the result will be two output lines reporting the 
result of the fork call and, in parentheses, the pid of the current process. With- 
out fork handlers, the child process will be created while the initial thread owns 
the mutex. Because the initial thread does not exist in the child, the mutex can- 
not be unlocked, and the child process will hang！only the parent process will 
print its message. 
13-25 Function fork_prepare is the prepare handler. This will be called by fork, in 
the parent process, before creating the child process. Any state changed by this 
function, in particular, mutexes that are locked, will be copied into the child pro- 
cess. The f ork_prepare function locks the program's mutex. 
31-42 Function f ork_parent is the parent handler. This will be called by fork, in the 
parent process, after creating the child process. In general, a parent handler 
should undo whatever was done in the prepare handler, so that the parent pro- 
cess can continue normally. The f ork_parent function unlocks the mutex that 
was locked by f ork_prepare. 
48-60 Function fork_child is the child handler. This will be called by fork, in the 
child process. In most cases, the child handler will need to do whatever was done 
in the f ork_parent handler to "unlock" the state so that the child can continue. 
It may also need to perform additional cleanup, for example, f ork_child sets the 
self_pid variable to the child process's pid as well as unlocking the process 
mutex. 
65-91 After creating a child process, which will continue executing the thread_ 
routine code, the thread_routine function locks the mutex. When run with fork 
handlers, the fork call will be blocked (when the prepare handler locks the mutex) 
until the mutex is available. Without fork handlers, the thread will fork before 
main unlocks the mutex, and the thread will hang in the child at this point. 
99-106 The main program declares fork handlers unless the program is run with an 
argument of 0. 
108-123 The main program locks the mutex before creating the thread that will fork. It 
then sleeps for several seconds, to ensure that the thread will be able to call fork 
while the mutex is locked, and then unlocks the mutex. The thread running 
thread_routine will always succeed in the parent process, because it will simply 
block until main releases the lock. 
However, without the fork handlers, the child process will be created while the 
mutex is locked. The thread (main) that locked the mutex does not exist in the 
child, and cannot unlock the mutex in the child process. Mutexes can be unlocked 
fork 201 
in the child only if they were locked by the thread that called fork！and fork han- 
dlers provide the best way to ensure that. 
| atfork.c 
1 #include <sys/types.h> 
2 #include <pthread.h> 
3 #include <sys/wait.h> 
4 #include "errors.h" 
5 
6 pid_t self_pid; /* pid of current process */ 
7 pthread_mutex_t mutex = PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER; 
8 
9 /* 
10 * This routine will be called prior to executing the fork, 
11 * within the parent process. 
12 */ 
13 void fork_prepare (void) 
14 { 
15 int status; 
16 
17 /* 
18 * Lock the mutex in the parent before creating the child, 
19 * to ensure that no other thread can lock it (or change any 
20 * associated shared state) until after the fork completes. 
21 */ 
22 status = pthread_mutex_lock (Smutex); 
23 if (status != 0) 
24 err_abort (status, "Lock in prepare handler"); 
25 } 
26 
27 /* 
28 * This routine will be called after executing the fork, within 
29 * the parent process 
30 */ 
31 void fork_parent (void) 
32 { 
33 int status; 
34 
35 /* 
36 * Unlock the mutex in the parent after the child has been 
37 * created. 
38 */ 
39 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (Smutex); 
40 if (status != 0) 
41 err_abort (status, "Unlock in parent handler"); 
42 } 
43 
202 CHAPTER 6 POSDC adjusts to threads 
44 /* 
45 * This routine will be called after executing the fork, within 
46 * the child process. 
47 */ 
48 void fork_child (void) 
49 { 
50 int status; 
51 
52 /* 
53 * Update the file scope "self_pid" within the child process, and 
54 * unlock the mutex. 
55 */ 
56 self_pid = getpid (); 
57 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (Smutex); 
58 if (status != 0) 
59 err_abort (status, "Unlock in child handler"); 
60 } 
61 
62 /* 
63 * Thread start routine, which will fork a new child process. 
64 */ 
65 void *thread_routine (void *arg) 
66 { 
67 pid_t child_pid; 
68 int status; 
69 
70 child_pid = fork (); 
71 if (child_pid == (pid_t)-l) 
72 errno_abort ("Fork"); 
73 
74 /* 
75 * Lock the mutex ！ without the atfork handlers, the mutex will 
76 * remain locked in the child process and this lock attempt will 
77 * hang (or fail with EDEADLK) in the child. 
78 */ 
79 status = pthread_mutex_lock (Smutex); 
80 if (status != 0) 
81 err_abort (status, "Lock in child"); 
82 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (Smutex); 
83 if (status != 0) 
84 err_abort (status, "Unlock in child"); 
85 printf ("After fork: %d (%d)\n", child_pid, selfjpid); 
86 if (child_pid != 0) { 
87 if ((pid_t)-l == waitpid (child_pid, (int*H, 0)) 
88 errno_abort ("Wait for child"); 
89 } 
90 return NULL; 
91 } 
92 
93 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
fork 203 
94 { 
95 pthread_t fork_thread; 
96 int atfork_flag = 1; 
97 int status; 
98 
99 if (argc > 1) 
100 atfork_flag = atoi (argv[l]); 
101 if (atfork_flag) { 
102 status = pthread_atfork ( 
103 fork_prepare, fork_parent, fork_child); 
104 if (status != 0) 
105 err_abort (status, "Register fork handlers"); 
106 } 
107 self_pid = getpid ( ); 
108 status = pthread_mutex_lock (Smutex); 
109 if (status != 0) 
110 err_abort (status, "Lock mutex"); 
111 /* 
112 * Create a thread while the mutex is locked. It will fork a 
113 * process, which (without atfork handlers) will run with the 
114 * mutex locked. 
115 */ 
116 status = pthread_create ( 
117 &fork_thread, NULL, thread_routine, NULL); 
118 if (status != 0) 
119 err_abort (status, "Create thread"); 
120 sleep E); 
121 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (Smutex); 
122 if (status != 0) 
123 err_abort (status, "Unlock mutex"); 
124 status = pthread_join (fork_thread, NULL); 
125 if (status != 0) 
126 err_abort (status, "Join thread"); 
127 return 0; 
128 } 
| atfork.c 
Now, imagine you are writing a library that manages network server connec- 
tions, and you create a thread for each network connection that listens for service 
requests. In your prepare fork handler you lock all of the library's mutexes to make 
sure the child's state is consistent and recoverable. In your parent fork handler 
you unlock those mutexes and return. When designing the child fork handler, you 
need to decide exactly what a fork means to your library. If you want to retain all 
network connections in the child, then you would create a new listener thread for 
each connection and record their identifiers in the appropriate data structures 
before releasing the mutexes. If you want the child to begin with no open connec- 
tions, then you would locate the existing parent connection data structures and 
free them, closing the associated files that were propagated by fork. 
204 CHAPTER 6 POSIX adjusts to threads 
6.2 exec 
The exec function isn't affected much by the presence of threads. The func- 
tion of exec is to wipe out the current program context and replace it with a new 
program. A call to exec immediately terminates all threads in the process except 
the thread calling exec. They do not execute cleanup handlers or thread-specific 
data destructors！the threads simply cease to exist. 
All synchronization objects also vanish, except for pshared mutexes (mutexes 
created using the pthread_process_shared attribute value) and pshared condi- 
tion variables, which remain usable as long as the shared memory is mapped by 
some process. You should, however, unlock any pshared mutexes that the cur- 
rent process may have locked！the system will not unlock them for you. 
6.3 Process exit 
In a nonthreaded program, an explicit call to the exit function has the same 
effect as returning from the program's main function. The process exits. Pthreads 
adds the pthread_exit function, which can be used to cause a single thread to 
exit while the process continues. In a threaded program, therefore, you call exit 
when you want the process to exit, or pthread_exit when you want only the call- 
ing thread to exit. 
In a threaded program, main is effectively the "thread start function" for the 
process's initial thread. Although returning from the start function of any other 
thread terminates that thread just as if it had called pthread_exit, returning 
from main terminates the process. All memory (and threads) associated with the 
process evaporate. Threads do not run cleanup handlers or thread-specific data 
destructors. Calling exit has the same effect. 
When you don't want to make use of the initial thread or make it wait for other 
threads to complete, you can exit from main by calling pthread_exit rather than 
by returning or calling exit. Calling pthread_exit from main will terminate the 
initial thread without affecting the other threads in the process, allowing them to 
continue and complete normally. 
The exit function provides a simple way to shut down the entire process. For 
example, if a thread determines that data has been severely corrupted by some 
error, it may be dangerous to allow the program to continue to operate on the 
data. When the program is somehow broken, it might be dangerous to attempt to 
shut down the application threads cleanly. In that case, you might call exit to stop 
all processing immediately. 
6.4 Stdio 
Pthreads specifies that the ANSI C standard I/O [stdio) functions are thread- 
safe. Because the stdio package requires static storage for output buffers and file 
Stdio 205 
state, stdio implementations will use synchronization, such as mutexes or 
semaphores. 
6.4.1 f lockf ile and f unlockf ile 
void flockfile (FILE *file); 
int ftrylockfile (FILE *file); 
void funlockfile (FILE *file); 
In some cases, it is important that a sequence of stdio operations occur in 
uninterrupted sequence; for example, a prompt followed by a read from the ter- 
minal, or two writes that need to appear together in the output file even if another 
thread attempts to write data between the two stdio calls. Therefore, Pthreads 
adds a mechanism to lock a file and specifies how file locking interacts with inter- 
nal stdio locking. To write a prompt string to stdin and read a response from 
stdout without allowing another thread to read from stdin or write to stdout 
between the two, you would need to lock both stdin and stdout around the two 
calls as shown in the following program, f lock.c. 
19-20 This is the important part: Two separate calls to f lockf ile are made, one for 
each of the two file streams. To avoid possible deadlock problems within stdio, 
Pthreads recommends always locking input streams before output streams, 
when you must lock both. That's good advice, and I've taken it by locking stdin 
before stdout. 
29-30 The two calls to funlockfile must, of course, be made in the opposite order. 
Despite the specialized call, you are effectively locking mutexes within the stdio 
library, and you should respect a consistent lock hierarchy. 
| flock.c 
1 #include <pthread.h> 
2 #include "errors.h" 
3 
4 /* 
5 * This routine writes a prompt to stdout (passed as the thread's 
6 * "arg"), and reads a response. All other I/O to stdin and stdout 
7 * is prevented by the file locks until both prompt and fgets are 
8 * complete. 
9 */ 
10 void *prompt_routine (void *arg) 
11 { 
12 char *prompt = (char*)arg; 
13 char *string; 
14 int len; 
15 
16 string = (char*)malloc A28); 
206 CHAPTER 6 POSIX adjusts to threads 
17 if (string == NULL) 
18 errno_abort ("Alloc string"); 
19 flockfile (stdin); 
20 flockfile (stdout); 
21 printf (prompt); 
22 if (fgets (string, 128, stdin) == NULL) 
23 string[0] = '\0'; 
24 else { 
25 len = strlen (string); 
26 if (len > 0 && string[len-l] == '\n') 
27 string!len-1] = '\0'; 
28 } 
29 funlockfile (stdout); 
30 funlockfile (stdin); 
31 return (void*)string; 
32 } 
33 
34 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
35 { 
36 pthread_t threadl, thread2, thread3; 
37 char *string; 
38 int status; 
39 
40 #ifdef sun 
41 /* 
42 * On Solaris 2.5, threads are not timesliced. To ensure 
43 * that our threads can run concurrently, we need to 
44 * increase the concurrency level. 
45 */ 
46 DPRINTF (("Setting concurrency level to 4\n")); 
47 thr_setconcurrency D); 
48 #endif 
49 status = pthread_create ( 
50 Sthreadl, NULL, prompt_routine, "Thread 1> "); 
51 if (status != 0) 
52 err_abort (status, "Create thread"); 
53 status = pthread_create ( 
54 &thread2, NULL, prompt_routine, "Thread 2> "); 
55 if (status != 0) 
56 err_abort (status, "Create thread"); 
57 status = pthread_create ( 
58 &thread3, NULL, prompt_routine, "Thread 3> "); 
59 if (status != 0) 
60 err_abort (status, "Create thread"); 
61 status = pthread_join (threadl, (void**)Sstring); 
62 if (status != 0) 
63 err_abort (status, "Join thread"); 
64 printf ("Thread 1: \"%s\"\n", string); 
65 free (string); 
66 status = pthread join (thread2, (void**)&string); 
Stdio 207 
67 if (status != 0) 
68 err_abort (status, "Join thread"); 
69 printf ("Thread 1: \"%s\"\n", string); 
70 free (string); 
71 status = pthread_join (thread3, (void**)sstring); 
72 if (status != 0) 
73 err_abort (status, "Join thread"); 
74 printf ("Thread 1: \"%s\"\n", string); 
75 free (string); 
76 return 0; 
77 } 
| flock.c 
You can also use the flockfile and funlockfile functions to ensure that a 
series of writes is not interrupted by a file access from some other thread. The 
f trylockf ile function works like pthread_mutex_trylock in that it attempts to 
lock the file and, if the file is already locked, returns an error status instead of 
blocking. 
6.4.2 getchar_unlocked and putchar_unlocked 
int getc_unlocked (FILE *stream); 
int getchar_unlocked (void); 
int putc_unlocked (int c, FILE *stream); 
int putchar_unlocked (int c); 
ANSI C provides functions to get and put single characters efficiently into 
stdio buffers. The functions getchar and putchar operate on stdin and stdout, 
respectively, and getc and putc can be used on any stdio file stream. These are 
traditionally implemented as macros for maximum performance, directly reading 
or writing the file stream's data buffer. Pthreads, however, requires these func- 
tions to lock the stdio stream data, to prevent code from accidentally corrupting 
the stdio buffers. 
The overhead of locking and unlocking mutexes will probably vastly exceed 
the time spent performing the character copy, so these functions are no longer 
high performance. Pthreads could have denned new functions that provided the 
locked variety rather than redefining the existing functions; however, the result 
would be that existing code would be unsafe for use in threads. The working 
group decided that it was preferable to make existing code slower, rather than to 
make it incorrect. 
Pthreads adds new functions that replace the old high-performance macros with 
essentially the same implementation as the traditional macros. The functions getc_ 
unlocked, putc_unlocked, getchar_unlocked, and putchar_unlocked do not per- 
form any locking, so you must use flockfile and funlockfile around any 
208 CHAPTER 6 POSIX adjusts to threads 
sequence of these operations. If you want to read or write a single character, you 
should usually use the locked variety rather than locking the file stream, calling the 
new unlocked get or put function, and then unlocking the file stream. 
If you want to perform a sequence of fast character accesses, where you would 
have previously used getchar and putchar, you can now use getchar_unlocked 
and putchar_unlocked. The following program, putchar.c, shows the difference 
between using putchar and using a sequence of putchar_unlocked calls within a 
file lock. 
9-20 When the program is run with a nonzero argument or no argument at all, it 
creates threads running the lock_routine function. This function locks the std- 
out file stream, and then writes its argument (a string) to stdout one character at 
a time using putchar_unlocked. 
28-37 When the program is run with a zero argument, it creates threads running the 
unlock_routine function. This function writes its argument to stdout one char- 
acter at a time using putchar. Although putchar is internally synchronized to 
ensure that the stdio buffer is not corrupted, the individual characters may 
appear in any order. 
| putchar.c 
1 #include <pthread.h> 
2 #include "errors.h" 
3 
4 /* 
5 * This function writes a string (the function's arg) to stdout, 
6 * by locking the file stream and using putchar_unlocked to write 
7 * each character individually. 
8 */ 
9 void *lock_routine (void *arg) 
10 { 
11 char *pointer; 
12 
13 flockfile (stdout); 
' 14 for (pointer = arg; *pointer != '\0'; pointer++) { 
15 putchar_unlocked (*pointer); 
16 sleep A); 
17 } 
18 funlockfile (stdout); 
19 return NULL; 
20 } 
21 
22 /* 
23 * This function writes a string (the function's arg) to stdout, 
24 * by using putchar to write each character individually. 
25 * Although the internal locking of putchar prevents file stream 
26 * corruption, the writes of various threads may be interleaved. 
27 */ 
28 void *unlock routine (void *arg) 
Thread-safe functions 209 
29 { 
30 char *pointer; 
31 
32 for (pointer = arg; *pointer != '\0'; pointer++) { 
33 putchar (*pointer); 
34 sleep A); 
35 } 
36 return NULL; 
37 } 
38 
39 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
40 { 
41 pthread_t threadl, thread2, thread3; 
42 int flock_flag = 1; 
43 void *(*thread_func)(void *); 
44 int status; 
45 
46 if (argc > 1) 
47 flock_flag = atoi (argv[l]); 
48 if (flock_flag) 
49 thread_func = lock_routine; 
50 else 
51 thread_func = unlock_routine; 
52 status = pthread_create ( 
53 Sthreadl, NULL, thread_func, "this is thread l\n"); 
54 if (status != 0) 
55 err_abort (status, "Create thread"); 
56 status = pthread_create ( 
57 &thread2, NULL, thread_func, "this is thread 2\n"); 
58 if (status != 0) 
59 err_abort (status, "Create thread"); 
60 status = pthread_create ( 
61 &thread3, NULL, thread_func, "this is thread 3\n"); 
62 if (status != 0) 
63 err_abort (status, "Create thread"); 
64 pthread_exit (NULL); 
65 } 
| putchar.c 
6.5 Thread-safe functions 
Although ANSI C and POSIX 1003.1-1990 were not developed with threads in 
mind, most of the functions they define can be made thread-safe without chang- 
ing the external interface. For example, although malloc and free must be 
changed to support threads, code calling these functions need not be aware of the 
changes. When you call malloc, it locks a mutex (or perhaps several mutexes) to 
210 CHAPTER 6 POSIX adjusts to threads 
perform the operation, or may use other equivalent synchronization mecha- 
nisms. But your code just calls malloc as it always has, and it does the same 
thing as always. 
In two main classes of functions, this is not true: 
? Functions that traditionally return pointers to internal static buffers, for 
example, asctime. An internal mutex wouldn't help, since the caller will 
read the formatted time string some time after the function returns and, 
therefore, after the mutex has been unlocked. 
? Functions that require static context between a series of calls, for example, 
strtok, which stores the current position within the token string in a local 
static variable. Again, using a mutex within strtok wouldn't help, because 
other threads would be able to overwrite the current location between two 
calls. 
In these cases, Pthreads has defined variants of the existing functions that are 
thread-safe, which are designated by the suffix "_r" at the end of the function 
name. These variants move context outside the library, under the caller's control. 
When each thread uses a private buffer or context, the functions are thread-safe. 
You can also share context between threads if you want！but the caller must pro- 
vide synchronization between the threads. If you want two threads to search a 
directory in parallel, you must synchronize their use of the shared struct 
dirent passed to readdir_r. 
A few existing functions, such as ctermid, are already thread-safe as long as 
certain restrictions are placed on parameters. These restrictions are noted in the 
following sections. 
6.5.1 User and terminal identification 
int getlogin_r (char *name, size_t namesize); 
char *ctermid (char *s); 
int ttyname_r (int fildes, 
char *name, size t namesize); 
These functions return data to a caller-specified buffer. For getlogin_r, 
namesize must be at least LOGIN_NAME_MAX characters. For ttyname_r, namesize 
must be at least tty_name_max characters. Either function returns a value of 0 on 
success, or an error number on failure. In addition to errors that might be 
returned by getlogin or ttyname, getlogin_r and ttyname_r may return ERANGE 
to indicate that the name buffer is too small. 
Pthreads requires that when ctermid (which has not changed) is used in a 
threaded environment, the s return argument must be specified as a pointer to a 
Thread-safe Junctions 211 
character buffer having at least L_ctermid bytes. It was felt that this restriction 
was sufficient, without defining a new variant to also specify the size of the buffer. 
Program getlogin.c shows how to call these functions. Notice that these func- 
tions do not depend on threads, or <pthread.h>, in any way, and may even be 
provided on systems that don't support threads. 
| getlogin.c 
1 #include <limits.h> 
2 #include "errors.h" 
3 
4 /* 
5 * If either TTY_NAME_MAX or LOGIN_NAME_MAX are undefined 
6 * (this means they are "indeterminate" values), assume a 
7 * reasonable size (for simplicity) rather than using sysconf 
8 * and dynamically allocating the buffers. 
9 */ 
10 #ifndef TTY_NAME_MAX 
11 # define TTY_NAME_MAX 128 
12 #endif 
13 #ifndef LOGIN_NAME_MAX 
14 # define LOGIN_NAME_MAX 32 
15 #endif 
16 
17 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
18 { 
19 char login_str[LOGIN_NAME_MAX]; 
20 char stdin_str[TTY_NAME_MAX]; 
21 char cterm_str[L_ctermid], *cterm_str_ptr; 
22 int status; 
23 
24 status = getlogin_r (login_str, sizeof (login_str)); 
25 if (status != 0) 
26 err_abort (status, "Get login"); 
27 cterm_str_ptr = ctermid (cterm_str); 
28 if (cterm_str_ptr == NULL) 
29 errno_abort ("Get cterm"); 
30 status = ttyname_r @, stdin_str, sizeof (stdin_str)); 
31 if (status != 0) 
32 err_abort (status, "Get stdin"); 
33 printf ("User: %s, cterm: %s, fd 0: %s\n", 
34 login_str, cterm_str, stdin_str); 
35 return 0; 
36 } 
| getlogin.c 
212 CHAPTER 6 POSIX adjusts to threads 
6.5.2 Directory searching 
int readdir_r (DIR *dirp, struct dirent *entry, I 
struct dirent **result); I 
This function performs essentially the same action as readdir. That is, it 
returns the next directory entry in the directory stream specified by dirp. The dif- 
ference is that instead of returning a pointer to that entry, it copies the entry into 
the buffer specified by entry. On success, it returns 0 and sets the pointer speci- 
fied by result to the buffer entry. On reaching the end of the directory stream, it 
returns 0 and sets result to null. On failure, it returns an error number such as 
EBADF. 
Refer to program pipe. c, in Section 4.1, for a demonstration of using readdir_r 
to allow your threads to search multiple directories concurrently. 
6.5.3 String token 
char *strtok_r ( I 
char *s, const char *sep, char **lasts); I 
This function returns the next token in the string s. Unlike strtok, the con- 
text (the current pointer within the original string) is maintained in lasts, which 
is specified by the caller, rather than in a static pointer internal to the function. 
In the first call of a series, the argument s gives a pointer to the string. In sub- 
sequent calls to return successive tokens of that string, s must be specified as 
NULL. The value lasts is set by strtok_r to maintain the function's position 
within the string, and on each subsequent call you must return that same value 
of lasts. The strtok_r function returns a pointer to the next token, or NULL 
when there are no more tokens to be found in the original string. 
6.5.4 Time representation 
char *asctime_r (const struct tm *tm, char *buf); 
char *ctime_r (const time_t *clock, char *buf); 
struct tm *gmtime_r ( 
const time_t *clock, struct tm *result); 
struct tm *localtime_r ( 
const time t *clock, struct tm *result); 
Thread-safe functions 213 
The output buffers (buf and result) are supplied by the caller, instead of 
returning a pointer to static storage internal to the functions. Otherwise, they are 
identical to the traditional variants. The asctime_r and ctime_r routines, which 
return ASCII character representations of a system time, both require that their 
buf argument point to a character string of at least 26 bytes. 
6.5.5 Random number generation 
int rand_r (unsigned int *seed); I 
The seed is maintained in caller-supplied storage (seed) rather than using 
static storage internal to the function. The main problem with this interface is 
that it is not usually practical to have a single seed shared by all application and 
library code within a program. As a result, the application and each library will 
generally have a separate "stream" of random numbers. Thus, a program con- 
verted to use rand_r instead of rand is likely to generate different results, even if 
no threads are created. (Creating threads would probably change the order of 
calls to rand, and therefore change results anyway.) 
6.5.6 Group and user database 
Group database: 
int getgrgid_r ( 
gid_t gid, struct group *grp, char *buffer, 
size_t bufsize, struct group **result); 
int getgrnam_r ( 
const char *name, struct group *grp, 
char *buffer, size_t bufsize, 
struct group **result); 
User database: 
int getpwuid_r ( 
uid_t uid, struct passwd *pwd, char *buffer, 
size_t bufsize, struct passwd **result); 
int getpwnam_r ( 
const char *name, struct passwd *pwd, 
char *buffer, size_t bufsize, 
struct passwd **result); 
These functions store a copy of the group or user record (grp or pwd, respec- 
tively) for the specified group or user (gid, uid, or name) in a buffer designated by 
214 CHAPTER 6 POSIX adjusts to threads 
the arguments buffer and bufsize. The function return value is in each case 
either 0 for success, or an error number (such as erange when the buffer is too 
small) to designate an error. If the requested record is not present in the group or 
passwd database, the functions may return success but store the value null into 
the result pointer. If the record is found and the buffer is large enough, result 
becomes a pointer to the struct group or struct passwd record within buffer. 
The maximum required size for buffer can be determined by calling sysconf 
with the argument _SC_GETGR_R_SIZE_MAX (for group data) or with the argument 
SC GETPW R SIZE max (for user data). 
6.6 Signals 
Beware the Jabberwock, my son! 
The jaws that bite, the claws that catch! 
Beware the Jubjub bird, and shun 
The frumious Bandersnatch! 
！Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking-Glass 
The history of the Pthreads signal-handling model is the most convoluted and 
confusing part of the standard. There were several different viewpoints, and it 
was difficult to devise a compromise that would satisfy everyone in the working 
group (much less the larger and more diverse balloting group). This isn't surpris- 
ing, since signals are complicated anyway, and have a widely divergent history in 
the industry. 
There were two primary conflicting goals: 
? First, "signals should be completely compatible with traditional UNIX." 
That means signal handlers and masks should remain associated with the 
process. That makes them virtually useless with multiple threads, which is 
as it should be since signals have complicating semantics that make it 
difficult for signals and threads to coexist peacefully. Tasks should be 
accomplished synchronously using threads rather than asynchronously 
using signals. 
? Second, "signals should be completely compatible with traditional UNIX." 
This time, "compatible" means signal handlers and masks should be com- 
pletely thread-private. Most existing UNIX code would then function 
essentially the same running within a thread as it had within a process. 
Code migration would be simplified. 
The problem is that the definitions of "compatible" were incompatible. Although 
many people involved in the negotiation may not agree with the final result, nearly 
everyone would agree that those who devised the compromise did an extraordinar- 
ily good job, and that they were quite courageous to attempt the feat. 
Signals 
215 
I When writing threaded code, treat signals as Jabberwocks！ 
curious and potentially dangerous creatures to be 
approached with caution, if at all. 
It is always best to avoid using signals in conjunction with threads. At the same 
time, it is often not possible or practical to keep them separate. When signals and 
threads meet, beware. If at all possible, use only pthread_sigmask to mask signals 
in the main thread, and sigwait to handle signals synchronously within a single 
thread dedicated to that purpose. If you must use sigaction (or equivalent) to 
handle synchronous signals (such as sigsegv) within threads, be especially cau- 
tious. Do as little work as possible within the signal-catching function. 
6.6.1 Signal actions 
All signal actions are process-wide. A program must coordinate any use of 
sigaction between threads. This is nonmodular, but also relatively simple, and 
signals have never been modular. A function that dynamically modifies signal 
actions, for example, to catch or ignore sigfpe while it performs floating-point 
operations, or sigpipe while it performs network I/O, will be tricky to code on a 
threaded system. 
While modifying the process signal action for a signal number is itself thread- 
safe, there is no protection against some other thread setting a new signal action 
immediately afterward. Even if the code tries to be "good" by saving the original 
signal action and restoring it, it may be foiled by another thread, as shown in 
Figure 6.1. 
Signals that are not "tied" to a specific hardware execution context are deliv- 
ered to one arbitrary thread within the process. That means a sigchld raised by 
a child process termination, for example, may not be delivered to the thread that 
created the child. Similarly, a call to kill results in a signal that may be delivered 
to any thread. 
Thread 1 
sigaction(SIGFPE) 
Generate sigfpe 
Restore action 
Thread 2 
sigaction(SIGFPE) 
restore action 
Comments 
Thread 
Thread 
l's signal action active. 
2's signal action active. 
Thread 1 signal is handled by the thread 2 
signal action (but still in the context of 
thread 1). 
Thread 
Thread 
origina 
1 restores original signal action. 
2 restores thread 1 's signal action！ 
action is lost. 
FIGURE 6.1 Nonmodularity of signal actions 
216 CHAPTER 6 POSIX adjusts to threads 
The synchronous "hardware context" signals, including sigfpe, sigsegv, and 
SIGTRAP, are delivered to the thread that caused the hardware condition, never to 
another thread. 
I You cannot kill a thread by sending it a SIGKILL or stop a thread by 
sending it a SIGSTOR 
Any signal that affected a process still affects the process when multiple 
threads are active, which means that sending a SIGKILL to a process or to any spe- 
cific thread in the process (using pthread_kill, which we'll get to in Section 6.6.3) 
will terminate the process. Sending a SIGSTOP will cause all threads to stop until 
a sigcont is received. This ensures that existing process control functions con- 
tinue to work！otherwise most threads in a process could continue running when 
you stopped a command by sending a sigstop. This also applies to the default 
action of the other signals, for example, SIGSEGV, if not handled, will terminate 
the process and generate a core file！it will not terminate only the thread that 
generated the SIGSEGV. 
What does this mean to a programmer? It has always been common wisdom 
that library code should not change signal actions！that this is exclusively the 
province of the main program. This philosophy becomes even more wise when 
you are programming with threads. Signal actions must always be under the con- 
trol of a single component, at least, and to assign that responsibility to the main 
program makes the most sense in nearly all situations. 
6.6.2 Signal masks 
int pthread_sigmask (int how, I 
const sigset_t *set, sigset_t *oset); I 
Each thread has its own private signal mask, which is modified by calling 
pthread_sigmask. Pthreads does not specify what sigprocmask does within a 
threaded process！it may do nothing. Portable threaded code does not call sig- 
procmask. A thread can block or unblock signals without affecting the ability of 
other threads to handle the signal. This is particularly important for synchronous 
signals. It would be awkward if thread A were unable to process a sigfpe because 
thread B was currently processing its own sigfpe or, even worse, because thread C 
had blocked sigfpe. When a thread is created, it inherits the signal mask of the 
thread that created it！if you want a signal to be masked everywhere, mask it first 
thing in main. 
Signals 217 
6.6.3 pthreadjdll 
int pthread_kill (pthread_t thread, int sig); I 
Within a process, one thread can send a signal to a specific thread (including 
itself) by calling pthread_kill. When calling pthread_kill, you specify not only 
the signal number to be delivered, but also the pthread_t identifier for the thread 
to which you want the signal sent. You cannot use pthread_kill to send a signal to 
a thread in another process, however, because a thread identifier (pthread_t) is 
meaningful only within the process that created it. 
The signal sent by pthread_kill is handled like any other signal. If the "tar- 
get" thread has the signal masked, it will be marked pending against that thread. 
If the thread is waiting for the signal in sigwait (covered in Section 6.6.4), the 
thread will receive the signal. If the thread does not have the signal masked, and 
is not blocked in sigwait, the current signal action will be taken. 
Remember that, aside from signal-catching functions, signal actions affect the 
process. Sending the SIGKILL signal to a specific thread using pthread_kill will 
kill the process, not just the specified thread. Use pthread_cancel to get rid of a 
particular thread (see Section 5.3). Sending sigstop to a thread will stop all 
threads in the process until a SIGCONT is sent by some other process. 
The raise function specified by ANSI C has traditionally been mapped to a kill 
for the current process. That is, raise (SIGABRT) is usually the same as kill 
(getpid ( ), SIGABRT). 
With multiple threads, code calling raise is most likely to intend that the sig- 
nal be sent to the calling thread, rather than to some arbitrary thread within the 
process. Pthreads specifies that raise (SIGABRT) is the same as pthread_kill 
(pthread_self (), SIGABRT). 
The following program, susp.c, uses pthread_kill to implement a portable 
"suspend and resume" (or, equivalently, "suspend and continue") capability 
much like that provided by the Solaris "UI threads" interfaces thr_suspend and 
thr_continue. You call the thd_suspend function with the pthread_t of a thread, 
and when the function returns, the specified thread has been suspended from 
execution. The thread cannot execute until a later call to thd_continue is made 
with the same pthread_t. 
A request to suspend a thread that is already suspended has no effect. Calling 
thd_continue a single time for a suspended thread will cause it to resume execu- 
tion, even if it had been suspended by multiple calls to thd_suspend. Calling thd_ 
continue for a thread that is not currently suspended has no effect. 
"The algorithm (and most of the code) for susp.c was developed by a coworker of mine, Brian 
Silver. The code shown here is a simplified version for demonstration purposes. 
218 
CHAPTER 6 POSIX adjusts to threads 
Suspend and resume are commonly used to solve some problems, for example, 
multithread garbage collectors, and may even work sometimes if the programmer 
is very careful. This emulation of suspend and resume may therefore be valuable 
to the few programmers who really need these functions. Beware, however, that 
should you suspend a thread while it holds some resource (such as a mutex), 
application deadlock can easily result. 
6 The symbol ITERATIONS defines how many times the "target" threads will loop. 
If this value is set too small, some or all of the threads will terminate before the 
main thread has been able to suspend and continue them as it desires. If that 
happens, the program will fail with an error message！increase the value of itera- 
tions until the problem goes away. 
12 The variable sentinel is used to synchronize between a signal-catching func- 
tion and another thread. "Oh?" you may ask, incredulously. This mechanism is 
not perfect！the suspending thread (the one calling thd_suspend) waits in a loop, 
yielding the processor until this sentinel changes state. The volatile storage 
attribute ensures that the signal-catching function will write the value to mem- 
ory.* Remember, you cannot use a mutex within a signal-catching function. 
22-40 The suspend_signal_handler function will be established as the signal- 
catching function for the "suspend" signal, SIGUSR1. It initializes a signal mask to 
block all signals except SIGUSR2, which is the "resume" signal, and then waits for 
that signal by calling sigsuspend. Just before suspending itself, it sets the senti- 
nel variable to inform the suspending thread that it is no longer executing user 
code！for most practical purposes, it is already suspended. 
The purpose for this synchronization between the signal-catching function 
and thd_suspend is that, to be most useful, the thread calling thd_suspend must 
be able to know when the target thread has been successfully suspended. Simply 
calling pthread_kill is not enough, because the system might not deliver the 
signal for a substantial period of time; we need to know when the signal has been 
received. 
47-51 The resume_signal_handler function will be established as the signal-catching 
function for the "resume" signal, sigusri. The function isn't important, since the 
signal is sent only to interrupt the call to sigsuspend in suspend_signal_handler. 
susp.c 
parti signal-catchingfunctions 
#include <pthread.h> 
#include <signal.h> 
#include "errors.h" 
#define THREAD_COUNT 
#define ITERATIONS 
20 
40000 
* A semaphore, as described later in Section 6.6.6, would provide cleaner, and somewhat saf- 
er, synchronization. The thd_suspend would call sem_wait on a semaphore with an initial value 
of 0, and the signal-catching function would call sem_post to wake it. 
Signals 219 
8 unsigned long thread_count = THREAD_COUNT; 
9 unsigned long iterations = ITERATIONS; 
10 pthread_mutex_t the_mutex = PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER; 
11 pthread_mutex_t mut = PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER; 
12 volatile int sentinel = 0; 
13 pthread_once_t once = PTHREAD_ONCE_INIT; 
14 pthread_t *array = NULL, null_pthread = {0}; 
15 int bottom = 0; 
16 int inited = 0; 
17 
18 /* 
19 * Handle SIGUSR1 in the target thread, to suspend it until 
20 * receiving SIGUSR2 (resume). 
21 */ 
22 void 
23 suspend_signal_handler (int sig) 
24 { 
25 sigset_t signal_set; 
26 
27 /* 
28 * Block all signals except SIGUSR2 while suspended. 
29 */ 
30 sigfillset (&signal_set); 
31 sigdelset (&signal_set, SIGUSR2); 
32 sentinel = 1; 
33 sigsuspend (&signal_set); 
34 
35 /* 
36 * Once I'm here, I've been resumed, and the resume signal 
37 * handler has been run to completion. 
38 */ 
39 return; 
40 } 
41 
42 /* 
43 * Handle SIGUSR2 in the target thread, to resume it. Note that 
44 * the signal handler does nothing. It exists only because we need 
45 * to cause sigsuspend() to return. 
46 */ 
47 void 
48 resume_signal_handler (int sig) 
49 { 
50 return; 
51 } 
| susp.c part 1 signal-catchingfunctions 
220 CHAPTER 6 POSIX adjusts to threads 
The suspend_init_routine function dynamically initializes the suspend/ 
resume package when the first call to thd_suspend is made. It is actually called 
indirectly by pthread_once. 
15-16 It allocates an initial array of thread identifiers, which is used to record the 
identifiers of all threads that have been suspended. This array is used to ensure 
that multiple calls to thd_suspend have no additional effect on the target thread, 
and that calling thd_continue for a thread that is not suspended has no effect. 
21-35 It sets up signal actions for the SIGUSRI and SIGUSR2 signals, which will be 
used, respectively, to suspend and resume threads. 
| susp.c part 2 initialization 
1 /* 
2 * Dynamically initialize the "suspend package" when first used 
3 * (called by pthread_once). 
4 */ 
5 void 
6 suspend_init_routine (void) 
7 { 
8 int status; 
9 struct sigaction sigusrl, sigusr2; 
10 
11 /* 
12 * Allocate the suspended threads array. This array is used 
13 * to guarentee idempotency 
14 */ 
15 bottom = 10; 
16 array = (pthread_t*) calloc (bottom, sizeof (pthread_t)); 
17 
18 /* 
19 * Install the signal handlers for suspend/resume. 
20 */ 
21 sigusrl.sa_flags = 0; 
22 sigusrl.sa_handler = suspend_signal_handler; 
23 
24 sigemptyset (Ssigusrl.sa_mask); 
25 sigusr2.sa_flags = 0; 
26 sigusr2.sa_handler = resume_signal_handler; 
27 sigusr2.sa_mask = sigusrl.sa_mask; 
28 
29 status = sigaction (SIGUSRI, Ssigusrl, NULL); 
30 if (status == -1) 
31 errno_abort ("Installing suspend handler"); 
32 
33 status = sigaction (SIGUSR2, &sigusr2, NULL); 
34 if (status == -1) 
35 errno abort ("Installing resume handler"); 
Signals 221 
36 
37 inited = 1; 
38 return; 
39 } 
| susp.c part 2 initialization 
9-40 The thd_suspend function suspends a thread, and returns when that thread 
has ceased to execute user code. It first ensures that the suspend/resume pack- 
age is initialized by calling pthread_once. Under protection of a mutex, it 
searches for the target thread's identifier in the array of suspended thread identi- 
fiers. If the thread is already suspended, thd_suspend returns successfully. 
47-60 Determine whether there is an empty entry in the array of suspended threads 
and, if not, realloc the array with an extra entry. 
65-78 The sentinel variable is initialized to 0, to detect when the target thread sus- 
pension occurs. The thread is sent a SIGUSRI signal by calling pthread_kill, and 
thd_suspend loops, calling sched_yield to avoid monopolizing a processor, until 
the target thread responds by setting sentinel. Finally, the suspended thread's 
identifier is stored in the array. 
| susp.c part 3 thd_suspend 
1 /* 
2 * Suspend a thread by sending it a signal (SIGUSRI), which will 
3 * block the thread until another signal (SIGUSR2) arrives. 
4 * 
5 * Multiple calls to thd_suspend for a single thread have no 
6 * additional effect on the thread ！ a single thd_continue 
7 * call will cause it to resume execution. 
8 */ 
9 int 
10 thd_suspend (pthread_t target_thread) 
11 { 
12 int status; 
13 int i = 0; 
14 
15 /* 
16 * The first call to thd_suspend will initialize the 
17 * package. 
18 */ 
19 status = pthread_once (Sonce, suspend_init_routine); 
20 if (status != 0) 
21 return status; 
22 
23 /* 
24 * Serialize access to suspend, makes life easier. 
25 */ 
222 CHAPTER 6 POSIX adjusts to threads 
26 status = pthread_mutex_lock (smut); 
27 if (status != 0) 
28 return status; 
29 
30 /* 
31 * Threads that are suspended are added to the target_array; 
32 * a request to suspend a thread already listed in the array 
33 * is ignored. Sending a second SIGUSR1 would cause the 
34 * thread to resuspend itself as soon as it is resumed. 
35 */ 
36 while (i < bottom) 
37 if (array[i++] == target_thread) { 
38 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (Smut); 
39 return status; 
40 } 
41 
42 /* 
43 * Ok, we really need to suspend this thread. So, let's find 
44 * the location in the array that we'll use. If we run off 
45 * the end, realloc the array for more space. 
46 */ 
47 i = 0; 
48 while (array[i] != 0) 
49 i++; 
50 
51 if (i == bottom) { 
52 array = (pthread_t*) realloc ( 
53 array, (++bottom * sizeof (pthread_t))); 
54 if (array == NULL) { 
55 pthread_mutex_unlock (Smut); 
56 return errno; 
57 } 
58 
59 arrayfbottom] = null_pthread; /* Clear new entry */ 
60 } 
61 
62 /* 
63 * Clear the sentinel and signal the thread to suspend. 
64 */ 
65 sentinel = 0; 
66 status = pthread_kill (target_thread, SIGUSR1); 
67 if (status != 0) { 
68 pthread_mutex_unlock (Smut); 
69 return status; 
70 > 
71 
72 /* 
73 * Wait for the sentinel to change. 
74 */ 
Signals 223 
75 while (sentinel == 0) 
76 sched_yield (); 
77 
78 array[i] = target_thread; 
79 
80 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (Smut); 
81 return status; 
82 } 
| susp.c part 3 thd_suspend 
23-26 The thd_continue function first checks whether the suspend/resume pack- 
age has been initialized (inited is not 0). If it has not been initialized, then no 
threads are suspended, and thd_continue returns with success. 
33-39 If the specified thread identifier is not found in the array of suspended 
threads, then it is not suspended！again, return with success. 
45-51 Send the resume signal, SIGUSR2. There's no need to wait！the thread will 
resume whenever it can, and the thread calling thd_continue doesn't need to 
know. 
| susp.c part 4 thd_continue 
1 /* 
2 * Resume a suspended thread by sending it SIGUSR2 to break 
3 * it out of the sigsuspend() in which it's waiting. If the 
4 * target thread isn't suspended, return with success. 
5 */ 
6 int 
7 thd_continue (pthread_t target_thread) 
8 { 
9 int status; 
10 int i = 0; 
11 
12 /* 
13 * Serialize access to suspend, makes life easier. 
14 */ 
15 status = pthread_mutex_lock (Smut); 
16 if (status != 0) 
17 return status; 
18 
19 /* 
20 * If we haven't been initialized, then the thread must be 
21 * "resumed"; it couldn't have been suspended! 
22 */ 
23 if (!inited) { 
24 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (Smut); 
25 return status; 
26 } 
27 
224 CHAPTER 6 POSIX adjusts to threads 
28 /* 
29 * Make sure the thread is in the suspend array. If not, it 
30 * hasn't been suspended (or it has already been resumed) and 
31 * we can just carry on. 
32 */ 
33 while (array[i] != target_thread && i < bottom) 
34 i++; 
35 
36 if (i >= bottom) { 
37 pthread_mutex_unlock (Smut); 
38 return 0; 
39 } 
40 
41 /* 
42 * Signal the thread to continue, and remove the thread from 
43 * the suspended array. 
44 */ 
45 status = pthread_kill (target_thread, SIGUSR2); 
46 if (status != 0) { 
47 pthread_mutex_unlock (Smut); 
48 return status; 
49 } 
50 
51 array[i] = 0; /* Clear array element */ 
52 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (smut); 
53 return status; 
54 } 
| susp.c part 4 thd_continue 
2-25 The thread_routine function is the thread start routine for each of the "target" 
threads created by the program. It simply loops for a substantial period of time, 
periodically printing a status message. On each iteration, it yields to other threads 
to ensure that the processor time is apportioned "fairly" across all the threads. 
Notice that instead of calling printf, the function formats a message with 
sprintf and then displays it on stdout (file descriptor 1) by calling write. This 
illustrates one of the problems with using suspend and resume (thd_suspend and 
thd_continue) for synchronization. Suspend and resume are scheduling func- 
tions, not synchronization functions, and using scheduling and synchronization 
controls together can have severe consequences. 
I Incautious use of suspend and resume can deadlock your application. 
In this case, if a thread were suspended while modifying a stdio stream, all other 
threads that tried to modify that stdio stream might block, waiting for a mutex that 
is locked by the suspended thread. The write function, on the other hand, is usu- 
ally a call to the kernel！the kernel is atomic with respect to signals, and therefore 
can't be suspended. Use of write, therefore, cannot cause a deadlock. 
Signals 225 
In general, you cannot suspend a thread that may possibly hold any resource, 
if that resource may be required by some other thread before the suspended 
thread is resumed. In particular, the result is a deadlock if the thread that would 
resume the suspended thread first needs to acquire the resource. This prohibi- 
tion includes, especially, mutexes used by libraries you call！such as the 
mutexes used by malloc and free, or the mutexes used by stdio. 
36-42 Threads are created with an attributes object set to create threads detached, 
rather than joinable. The result is that threads will cease to exist as soon as they 
terminate, rather than remaining until main calls pthread_join. The pthread_ 
kill function does not necessarily fail if you attempt to send a signal to a termi- 
nated thread (the standard is silent on this point), and you may be merely setting 
a pending signal in a thread that will never be able to act on it. If this were to 
occur, the thd_suspend routine would hang waiting for the thread to respond. 
Although pthread_kill may not fail when sending to a terminated thread, it will 
fail when sending to a thread that doesn't exist！so this attribute converts a pos- 
sible hang, when the program is run with iterations set too low, into an abort 
with an error message. 
51-85 The main thread sleeps for two seconds after creating the threads to allow 
them to reach a "steady state." It then loops through the first half of the threads, 
suspending each of them. It waits an additional two seconds and then resumes 
each of the threads it had suspended. It waits another two seconds, suspends each 
of the remaining threads (the second half), and then after another two seconds 
resumes them. 
By watching the status messages printed by the individual threads, you can 
see the pattern of output change as the threads are suspended and resumed. 
| susp.c part 5 sampleprogram 
1 static void * 
2 thread_routine (void *arg) 
3 { 
4 int number = (int)arg; 
5 int status; 
6 int i; 
7 char buffer[128] ; 
8 
9 for (i = 1; i <= iterations; i++) { 
10 /* 
11 * Every time each thread does 5000 interations, print 
12 * a progress report. 
13 */ 
14 if (i % 2000 == 0) { 
15 sprintf ( 
16 buffer, "Thread %02d: %d\n", 
17 number, i); 
18 write A, buffer, strlen (buffer)); 
19 } 
20 
226 CHAPTER 6 POSIX adjusts to threads 
21 sched_yield (); 
22 } 
23 
24 return (void *H; 
25 } 
26 
27 int 
28 main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
29 { 
30 pthread_t threads[THREAD_COUNT]; 
31 pthread_attr_t detach; 
32 int status; 
33 void *result; 
34 int i; 
35 
36 status = pthread_attr_init (Sdetach); 
37 if (status != 0) 
38 err_abort (status, "Init attributes object"); 
39 status = pthread_attr_setdetachstate ( 
40 Sdetach, PTHREAD_CREATE_DETACHED); 
41 if (status != 0) 
42 err_abort (status, "Set create-detached"); 
43 
44 for (i = 0; i< THREAD_COUNT; i++) { 
45 status = pthread_create ( 
46 &threads[i], Sdetach, thread_routine, (void *)i); 
47 if (status != 0) 
48 err_abort (status, "Create thread"); 
49 } 
50 
51 sleep B); 
52 
53 for (i = 0; i < THREAD_COUNT/2; i++) { 
54 printf ("Suspending thread %d.\n", i); 
55 status = thd_suspend (threads[i]); 
56 if (status != 0) 
57 err_abort (status, "Suspend thread"); 
58 } 
59 
60 printf ("Sleeping ...\n"); 
61 sleep B); 
62 
63 for (i = 0; i < THREAD_COUNT/2; i++) { 
64 printf ("Continuing thread %d.\n", i); 
65 status = thd_continue (threads[i]); 
66 if (status != 0) 
67 err_abort (status, "Suspend thread"); 
68 } 
69 
Signals 227 
70 for (i = THREAD_C0UNT/2; i < THREAD_COUNT; i 
71 printf ("Suspending thread %d.\n", i); 
72 status = thd_suspend (threads[i]); 
73 if (status != 0) 
74 err_abort (status, "Suspend thread"); 
75 } 
76 
77 printf ("Sleeping ...\n"); 
78 sleep B); 
79 
80 for (i = THREAD_COUNT/2; i < THREAD_COUNT; i 
81 printf ("Continuing thread %d.\n", i); 
82 status = thd_continue (threads[i]); 
83 if (status != 0) 
84 err_abort (status, "Continue thread"); 
85 } 
86 
87 pthread_exit (NULL); /* Let threads finish */ 
88 } 
| susp.c part 5 sampleprogram 
6.6.4 sigwait and sigwaitinfo 
int sigwait (const sigset 
t *set, int *sig); 
fifdef _POSIX_REALTIME_SIGNALS 
int sigwaitinfo ( 
const sigset t *set, 
int sigtimedwait ( 
const sigset t *set, 
const struct timespec 
#endif 
siginfo t 
siginfo_t 
|timeout) 
*info); 
*info, 
r 
I Always use sigwait to work with asynchronous signals within threaded 
code. 
Pthreads adds a function to allow threaded programs to deal with "asynchro- 
nous" signals synchronously. That is, instead of allowing a signal to interrupt a 
thread at some arbitrary point, a thread can choose to receive a signal synchro- 
nously. It does this by calling sigwait, or one of sigwait's siblings. 
I The signals for which you sigwait must be masked in the sigwaiting 
thread, and should usually be masked in all threads. 
The sigwait function takes a signal set as its argument, and returns a signal 
number when any signal in that set occurs. You can create a thread that waits for 
228 CHAPTER 6 POSIX adjusts to threads 
some signal, for example, sigint, and causes some application activity when it 
occurs. The nonobvious rule is that the signals for which you wait must be 
masked before calling sigwait. In fact, you should ideally mask these signals in 
main, at the start of the program. Because signal masks are inherited by threads 
you create, all threads will (by default) have the signal masked. This ensures that 
the signal will never be delivered to any thread except the one that calls sigwait. 
Signals are delivered only once. If two threads are blocked in sigwait, only 
one of them will receive a signal that's sent to the process. This means you can't, 
for example, have two independent subsystems using sigwait that catch SIGINT. 
It also means that the signal will not be caught by sigwait in one thread and also 
delivered to some signal-catching function in another thread. That's not so bad, 
since you couldn't do that in the old nonthreaded model either！only one signal 
action can be active at a time. 
While sigwait, a Pthreads function, reports errors by returning an error num- 
ber, its siblings, sigwaitinfo and sigtimedwait, were added to POSIX prior to 
Pthreads, and use the older errno mechanism. This is confusing and awkward, 
and that is unfortunate. The problem is that they deal with the additional informa- 
tion supplied by the POSIX realtime signals option (<unistd. h> defines the symbol 
_P0SIX_realtime_SIGNALS), and the POSIX realtime amendment, POSIX. 1b, was 
completed before the Pthreads amendment. 
Both sigwaitinfo and sigtimedwait return the realtime signal information, 
siginfo_t, for signals received. In addition, sigtimedwait allows the caller to 
specify that sigtimedwait should return with the error EAGAIN in the event that 
none of the selected signals is received within the specified interval. 
The sigwait.c program creates a "sigwait thread" that handles SIGINT. 
23-41 The signal_waiter thread repeatedly calls sigwait, waiting for a SIGINT sig- 
nal. It counts five occurrences of sigint (printing a message each time), and then 
signals a condition variable on which main is waiting. At that time, main will exit. 
61-65 The main program begins by masking sigint. Because all threads inherit 
their initial signal mask from their creator, SIGINT will be masked in all threads. 
This prevents SIGINT from being delivered at any time except when the signal_ 
waiter thread is blocked in sigwait and ready to receive the signal. 
| sigwait.c 
1 #include <sys/types.h> 
2 #include <unistd.h> 
3 #include <pthread.h> 
4 #include <signal.h> 
5 #include "errors.h" 
6 
7 pthread_mutex_t mutex = PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER; 
8 pthread_cond_t cond = PTHREAD_COND_INITIALIZER; 
9 int interrupted = 0; 
10 sigset_t signal_set; 
11 
Signals 229 
12 /* 
13 * Wait for the SIGINT signal. When it has occurred 5 times, set the 
14 * "interrupted" flag (the main thread's wait predicate) and signal a 
15 * condition variable. The main thread will exit. 
16 */ 
17 void *signal_waiter (void *arg) 
18 { 
19 int sig_number; 
20 int signal_count = 0; 
21 int status; 
22 
23 while A) { 
24 sigwait (&signal_set, &sig_number); 
25 if (sig_number == SIGINT) { 
26 printf ("Got SIGINT (%d of 5)\n", signal_count+l); 
27 if (++signal_count >= 5) { 
28 status = pthread_mutex_lock (Smutex); 
29 if (status != 0) 
30 err_abort (status, "Lock mutex"); 
31 interrupted = 1; 
32 status = pthread_cond_signal (Scond); 
33 if (status != 0) 
34 err_abort (status, "Signal condition"); 
35 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (Smutex); 
36 if (status != 0) 
37 err_abort (status, "Unlock mutex"); 
38 break; 
39 } 
40 } 
41 } 
42 return NULL; 
43 } 
44 
45 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
46 { 
47 pthread_t signal_thread_id; 
48 int status; 
49 
50 /* 
51 * Start by masking the "interesting" signal, SIGINT in the 
52 * initial thread. Because all threads inherit the signal mask 
53 * from their creator, all threads in the process will have 
54 * SIGINT masked unless one explicitly unmasks it. The 
55 * semantics of sigwait requires that all threads (including 
56 * the thread calling sigwait) have the signal masked, for 
57 * reliable operation. Otherwise, a signal that arrives 
58 * while the sigwaiter is not blocked in sigwait might be 
59 * delivered to another thread. 
60 */ 
230 CHAPTERS POSIXadjusts to threads 
61 sigemptyset (&signal_set); 
62 sigaddset (&signal_set, SIGINT); 
63 status = pthread_sigmask (SIG_BL0CK, &signal_set, NULL); 
64 if (status != 0) 
65 err_abort (status, "Set signal mask"); 
66 
67 /* 
68 * Create the sigwait thread. 
69 */ 
70 status = pthread_create (&signal_thread_id, NULL, 
71 signal_waiter, NULL); 
72 if (status != 0) 
73 err_abort (status, "Create sigwaiter"); 
74 
75 /* 
76 * Wait for the sigwait thread to receive SIGINT and signal 
77 * the condition variable. 
78 */ 
79 status = pthread_mutex_lock (Smutex); 
80 if (status != 0) 
81 err_abort (status, "Lock mutex"); 
82 while (!interrupted) { 
83 status = pthread_cond_wait (Scond, Smutex); 
84 if (status != 0) 
85 err_abort (status, "Wait for interrupt"); 
86 } 
87 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (Smutex); 
88 if (status != 0) 
89 err_abort (status, "Unlock mutex"); 
90 printf ("Main terminating with SIGINT\n"); 
91 return 0; 
92 } 
| sigwait.c 
6.6.5 SIGEVJHREAD 
Some of the functions in the POSIX. lb realtime standard, which provide for 
asynchronous notification, allow the programmer to give specific instructions 
about how that notification is to be accomplished. For example, when initiating 
an asynchronous device read or write using aio_read or aio_write, the pro- 
grammer specifies a struct aiocb, which contains, among other members, a 
struct sigevent. Other functions that accept a struct sigevent include timer_ 
create (which creates a per-process timer) and sigqueue (which queues a signal 
to a process). 
Signals 231 
The struct sigevent structure in POSIX. lb provides a "notification mecha- 
nism" that allows the programmer to specify whether a signal is to be generated, 
and, if so, what signal number should be used. Pthreads adds a new notification 
mechanism called SIGEV_THREAD. This new notification mechanism causes the 
signal notification function to be run as if it were the start routine of a thread. 
Pthreads adds several members to the POSIX. lb struct sigevent structure. 
The new members are sigev_notify_function, a pointer to a thread start func- 
tion; and sigev_notify_attributes, a pointer to a thread attributes object 
(pthread_attr_t) containing the desired thread creation attributes. If sigev_ 
notify_attributes is NULL, the notify thread is created as if the detachstate 
attribute was set to pthread_create_detached. This avoids a memory leak！in 
general, the notify thread's identifier won't be available to any other thread. Fur- 
thermore, Pthreads says that the result of specifying an attributes object that has 
the detachstate attribute set to pthread_create_joinable is "undefined." (Most 
likely, the result will be a memory leak because the thread cannot be joined！if 
you are lucky, the system may override your choice and create it detached 
anyway.) 
The sigevjthread notification function may not actually be run in a new 
thread！Pthreads carefully specifies that it behaves as if it were run in a new thread, 
just as I did a few paragraphs ago. The system may, for example, queue sigev_ 
THREAD events and call the start routines, serially, in some internal "server 
thread." The difference is effectively indistinguishable to the application. A sys- 
tem that uses a server thread must be very careful about the attributes specified 
for the notification thread！for example, scheduling policy and priority, conten- 
tion scope, and minimum stack size must all be taken into consideration. 
The SIGEV_THREAD feature is not available to any of the "traditional" signal 
generation mechanisms, such as setitimer, or for SIGCHLD, SIGINT, and so forth. 
Those who are programming using the POSIX. lb "realtime signal" interfaces, 
including timers and asynchronous I/O, may find this new capability useful. 
The following program, sigev_thread.c, shows how to use the SIGEV_THREAD 
notification mechanism for a POSIX. lb timer. 
20-37 The function timer_thread is specified as the "notification function" (thread 
start routine) for the sigevjthread timer. The function will be called each time 
the timer expires. It counts expirations, and wakes the main thread after five. 
Notice that, unlike a signal-catching function, the sigev_thread notification 
function can make full use of Pthreads synchronization operations. This can be a 
substantial advantage in many situations. 
45-51 Unfortunately, neither Solaris 2.5 nor Digital UNIX 4.0 correctly implemented 
SIGEV_THREAD. Thus, unlike all other examples in this book, this code will not 
compile on Solaris 2.5. This #ifdef block allows the code to compile, and to fail 
gracefully if the resulting program is run, with an error message. Although the 
program will compile on Digital UNIX 4.0, it will not run. The implementation of 
sigev_thread has been fixed in Digital UNIX 4.0D, which should be available by 
the time you read this, and it should also be fixed in Solaris 2.6. 
232 CHAPTER 6 POSIX adjusts to threads 
56-59 These statements initialize the sigevent structure, which describes how the 
system should notify the application when an event occurs. In this case, we are 
telling it to call timer_thread when the timer expires, and to use default 
attributes. 
| sigev_thread.c 
1 #include <pthread.h> 
2 #include <sys/signal.h> 
3 #include <sys/time.h> 
4 #include "errors.h" 
5 
6 timer_t timer_id; 
7 pthread_mutex_t mutex = PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER; 
8 pthread_cond_t cond = PTHREAD_COND_INITIALIZER; 
9 int counter = 0; 
10 
11 /* 
12 * Thread start routine to notify the application when the 
13 * timer expires. This routine is run "as if" it were a new 
14 * thread, each time the timer expires. 
15 * 
16 * When the timer has expired 5 times, the main thread will 
17 * be awakened, and will terminate the program. 
18 */ 
19 void 
20 timer_thread (void *arg) 
21 { 
22 int status; 
23 
24 status = pthread_mutex_lock (smutex); 
25 if (status != 0) 
26 err_abort (status, "Lock mutex"); 
27 if (++counter >= 5) { 
28 status = pthread_cond_signal (Scond); 
29 if (status != 0) 
30 err_abort (status, "Signal condition"); 
31 } 
32 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (Smutex); 
33 if (status != 0) 
34 err_abort (status, "Unlock mutex"); 
35 
36 printf ("Timer %d\n", counter); 
37 } 
38 
39 main( ) 
Signals 233 
40 { 
41 int status; 
42 struct itimerspec ts; 
43 struct sigevent se; 
44 
45 #ifdef sun 
46 fprintf ( 
47 stderr, 
48 "This program cannot compile on Solaris 2.5.\n" 
49 "To build and run on Solaris 2.6, remove the\n" 
50 "\"#ifdef sun\" block in main().\n"); 
51 #else 
52 /* 
53 * Set the sigevent structure to cause the signal to be 
54 * delivered by creating a new thread. 
55 */ 
56 se.sigev_notify = SIGEV_THREAD; 
57 se.sigev_value.sival_ptr = &timer_id; 
58 se.sigev_notify_function = timer_thread; 
59 se.sigev_notify_attributes = NULL; 
60 
61 /* 
62 * Specify a repeating timer that fires every 5 seconds. 
63 */ 
64 ts.it_value.tv_sec = 5; 
65 ts.it_value.tv_nsec = 0; 
66 ts.it_interval.tv_sec =5; 
67 ts.it_interval.tv_nsec = 0; 
68 
69 DPRINTF (("Creating timer\n")); 
70 status = timer_create(CLOCK_REALTIME, &se, &timer_id); 
71 if (status == -1) 
72 errno_abort ("Create timer"); 
73 
74 DPRINTF (( 
75 "Setting timer %d for 5-second expiration...\n", timer_id)); 
76 status = timer_settime(timer_id, 0, &ts, 0); 
77 if (status == -1) 
78 errno_abort ("Set timer"); 
79 
80 status = pthread_mutex_lock (Smutex); 
81 if (status != 0) 
82 err_abort (status, "Lock mutex"); 
83 while (counter < 5) { 
84 status = pthread_cond_wait (Scond, Smutex); 
85 if (status != 0) 
86 err_abort (status, "Wait on condition"); 
87 } 
234 CHAPTER 6 POSIX adjusts to threads 
88 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (Smutex); 
89 if (status != 0) 
90 err_abort (status, "Unlock mutex"); 
91 
92 #endif /* Sun */ 
93 return 0; 
94 } 
| sigev thread.c 
6.6.6 Semaphores: synchronizing with a signal-catching function 
#ifdef 
int 
int 
int 
int 
int 
int 
sem 
int 
sem 
sem 
_POSIX_SEMAPHORES 
init (sem t *sem, 
pshared, unsigned int value); 
destroy (sem t *sem); 
wait (sem t *sem); 
sem trywake (sem t *sem); 
sem post (sem_t *sem); 
sem 
#endif 
getvalue (sem t *sem, int *sval); 
Although mutexes and condition variables provide an ideal solution to most 
synchronization needs, they cannot meet all needs. One example of this is a need 
to communicate between a POSIX signal-catching function and a thread waiting 
for some asynchronous event. In new code, it is best to use sigwait or sigwait- 
inf o rather than relying on a signal-catching function, and this neatly avoids this 
problem. However, the use of asynchronous POSIX signal-catching functions is 
well established and widespread, and most programmers working with threads 
and existing code will probably encounter this situation. 
To awaken a thread from a POSIX signal-catching function, you need a mech- 
anism that's reentrant with respect to POSIX signals (async-signal safe). POSIX 
provides relatively few of these functions, and none of the Pthreads functions is 
included. That's primarily because an async-signal safe mutex lock operation 
would be many times slower than one that isn't async-signal safe. Outside of the 
kernel, making a function async-signal safe usually requires that the function 
mask (block) signals while it runs！and that is expensive. 
In case you're curious, here is the full list of POSIX 1003.1-1996 functions 
that are async-signal safe (some of these functions exist only when certain POSIX 
options are denned, such as _posix_asynchronous_io or _posix_timers): 
Signals 
235 
access 
aio error 
aio return 
aio suspend 
alarm 
cfgetispeed 
cfgetospeed 
cfsetispeed 
cfsetospeed 
chdir 
chmod 
chown 
clock gettime 
close 
creat 
dup2 
dup 
execle 
execve 
exit 
fcntl 
fdatasync 
fork 
fstat 
f sync 
getegid 
geteuid 
getgid 
getoverrun 
getgroups 
getpgrp 
getpid 
getppid 
getuid 
kill 
link 
lseek 
mkdir 
mkfifo 
open 
pathconf 
pause 
pipe 
read 
rename 
rmdir 
sem post 
setgid 
setpgid 
setsid 
setuid 
sigaction 
sigaddset 
sigdelset 
sigemptyset 
sigfillset 
sigismember 
sigpending 
sigprocmask 
sigqueue 
sigsuspend 
sleep 
stat 
sysconf 
tcdrain 
tcflow 
tcflush 
tcgetattr 
tcgetpgrp 
tcsendbreak 
tcsetattr 
tcsetpgrp 
time 
timer getoverrun 
timer gettime 
timer settime 
times 
umask 
uname 
unlink 
utime 
wait 
waitpid 
write 
POSIX. lb provides counting semaphores, and most systems that support 
Pthreads also support POSIX. lb semaphores. You may notice that the sem_post 
function, which wakes threads waiting on a semaphore, appears in the list of 
async-signal safe functions. If your system supports POSIX semaphores 
(<unistd.h> defines the _posix_semaphores option), then Pthreads adds the 
ability to use semaphores between threads within a process. That means you can 
post a semaphore, from within a POSIX signal-catching function, to wake a 
thread in the same process or in another process. 
A semaphore is a different kind of synchronization object！it is a little like a 
mutex, a little like a condition variable. The differences can make semaphores a 
little harder to use for many common tasks, but they make semaphores substan- 
tially easier to use for certain specialized purposes. In particular, semaphores can 
be posted (unlocked or signaled) from a POSIX signal-catching function. 
236 CHAPTER 6 POSIX adjusts to threads 
Semaphores are a general synchronization mechanism. 
We just have no reason to use them that way. 
I am emphasizing the use of semaphores to pass information from a signal- 
catching function, rather than for general use, for a couple of reasons. One rea- 
son is that semaphores are part of a different standard. As I said, most systems 
that support Pthreads will also support POSIX. lb, but there is no such require- 
ment anywhere in the standard. So you may well find yourself without access to 
semaphores, and you shouldn't feel dependent on them. {Of course, you may also 
find yourself with semaphores and without threads！but in that case, you should 
be reading a different book.) 
Another reason for keeping semaphores here with signals is that, although 
semaphores are a completely general synchronization mechanism, it can be more 
difficult to solve many problems using semaphores！mutexes and condition vari- 
ables are simpler. If you've got Pthreads, you only need semaphores to handle 
this one specialized function！waking a waiting thread from a signal-catching 
function. Just remember that you can use them for other things when they're 
convenient and available. 
POSIX semaphores contain a count, but no "owner," so although they can be 
used essentially as a lock, they can also be used to wait for events. The terminol- 
ogy used in the POSIX semaphore operations stresses the "wait" behavior rather 
than the "lock" behavior. Don't be confused by the names, though; there's no dif- 
ference between "waiting" on a semaphore and "locking" the semaphore. 
A thread waits on a semaphore (to lock a resource, or wait for an event) by 
calling sem_wait. If the semaphore counter is greater than zero, sera_wait decre- 
ments the counter and returns immediately. Otherwise, the thread blocks. A 
thread can post a semaphore (to unlock a resource, or awaken a waiter) by calling 
sem_post. If one or more threads are waiting on the semaphore, sem_post will 
wake one waiter (the highest priority, or earliest, waiter). If no threads are wait- 
ing, the semaphore counter is incremented. 
The initial value of the semaphore counter is the distinction between a "lock" 
semaphore and a "wait" semaphore. By creating a semaphore with an initial count 
of 1, you allow one thread to complete a sem_wait operation without blocking！ 
this "locks" the semaphore. By creating a semaphore with an initial count of 0, you 
force all threads that call sem_wait to block until some thread calls sem_post. 
The differences in how semaphores work give the semaphore two important 
advantages over mutexes and condition variables that may be of use in threaded 
programs: 
1. Unlike mutexes, semaphores have no concept of an "owner." This means 
that any thread may release threads blocked on a semaphore, much as if 
any thread could unlock a mutex that some thread had locked. (Although 
this is usually not a good programming model, there are times when it is 
handy.) 
Signals 237 
2. Unlike condition variables, semaphores can be independent of any exter- 
nal state. Condition variables depend on a shared predicate and a mutex 
for waiting！semaphores do not. 
A semaphore is represented in your program by a variable of type sem_t. You 
should never make a copy of a sem_t variable！the result of using a copy of a 
sem_t variable in the sem_wait, sem_trywait, sem_post, and sem_destroy func- 
tions is undefined. For our purposes, a sem_t variable is initialized by calling the 
sem_init function. POSIX. lb provides other ways to create a "named" semaphore 
that can be shared between processes without sharing memory, but there is no 
need for this capability when using a semaphore within a single process. 
Unlike Pthreads functions, the POSIX semaphore functions use errno to 
report errors. That is, success is designated by returning the value 0, and errors 
are designated by returning the value -1 and setting the variable errno to an 
error code. 
If you have a section of code in which you want up to two threads to execute 
simultaneously while others wait, you can use a semaphore without any addi- 
tional state. Initialize the semaphore to the value 2; then put a sem_wait at the 
beginning of the code and a sem_post at the end. Two threads can then wait on 
the semaphore without blocking, but a third thread will find the semaphore's 
counter at 0, and block. As each thread exits the region of code it posts the sema- 
phore, releasing one waiter (if any) or restoring the counter. 
The sem_getvalue function returns the current value of the semaphore 
counter if there are no threads waiting. If threads are waiting, sem_getvalue 
returns a negative number. The absolute value of that number tells how many 
threads are waiting on the semaphore. Keep in mind that the value it returns 
may already be incorrect！it can change at any time due to the action of some 
other thread. 
The best use for sem_getvalue is as a way to wake multiple waiters, somewhat 
like a condition variable broadcast. Without sem_getvalue, you have no way of 
knowing how many threads might be blocked on a semaphore. To "broadcast" a 
semaphore, you could call sem_getvalue and sem_jpost in a loop until sem_getvalue 
reports that there are no more waiters. 
But remember that other threads can call sem_post during this loop, and 
there is no synchronization between the various concurrent calls to sem_post and 
sem_getvalue. You can easily end up issuing one or more extra calls to sem_post, 
which will cause the next thread that calls sem_wait to find a value greater than 0, 
and return immediately without blocking. 
The program below, semaphore_signal.c, uses a semaphore to awaken 
threads from within a POSIX signal-catching function. Notice that the sem_init 
call sets the initial value to 0 so that each thread calling sem_wait will block. The 
main program then requests an interval timer, with a POSIX signal-catching 
function that will wake one waiting thread by calling sem_post. Each occurrence 
of the POSIX timer signal will awaken one waiting thread. The program will exit 
when each thread has been awakened five times. 
238 CHAPTER 6 POSIX adjusts to threads 
32-35 Notice the code to check for eintr return status from the sem_wait call. The 
POSIX timer signal in this program will always occur while one or more threads 
are blocked in sem_wait. When a signal occurs for a process (such as a timer sig- 
nal), the system may deliver that signal within the context of any thread within 
the process. Likely "victims" include threads that the kernel knows to be waiting, 
for example, on a semaphore. So there is a fairly good chance that the sem_wait 
thread will be chosen, at least sometimes. If that occurs, the call to sem_wait will 
return with eintr. The thread must then retry the call. Treating an eintr return 
as "success" would make it appear that two threads had been awakened by each 
call to sem_post: the thread that was interrupted, and the thread that was awak- 
ened by the sem_post call. 
| semaphore_signal.c 
1 #include <sys/types.h> 
2 tinclude <unistd.h> 
3 #include <pthread.h> 
4 linclude <semaphore.h> 
5 #include <signal.h> 
6 #include <time.h> 
7 #include "errors.h" 
8 
9 sem_t semaphore; 
10 
11 /* 
12 * Signal-catching function. 
13 */ 
14 void signal_catcher (int sig) 
15 { 
16 if (sem_post (Ssemaphore) == -1) 
17 errno_abort ("Post semaphore"); 
18 } 
19 
20 /* 
21 * Thread start routine which waits on the semaphore. 
22 */ 
23 void *sem_waiter (void *arg) 
24 { 
25 int number = (int)arg; 
26 int counter; 
27 
28 /* 
29 * Each thread waits 5 times. 
30 */ 
31 for (counter = 1; counter <= 5; counter++) { 
32 while (sem wait (Ssemaphore) == -1) { 
Signals 239 
33 if (errno != EINTR) 
34 errno_abort ("Wait on semaphore"); 
35 } 
36 printf ("%d waking (%d)...\n", number, counter); 
37 } 
38 return NULL; 
39 } 
40 
41 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
42 { 
43 int thread_count, status; 
44 struct sigevent sig_event; 
45 struct sigaction sig_action; 
46 sigset_t sig_mask; 
47 timer_t timer_id; 
48 struct itimerspec timer_val; 
49 pthread_t sem_waiters[5]; 
50 
51 #if !defined(_POSIX_SEMAPHORES) || !defined(_POSIX_TIMERS) 
52 # if !defined(_POSIX_SEMAPHORES) 
53 printf ("This system does not support POSIX semaphores\n"); 
54 # endif 
55 # if !defined(_POSIX_TIMERS) 
56 printf ("This system does not support POSIX timers\n"); 
57 # endif 
58 return -1; 
59 #else 
60 sem_init (^semaphore, 0, 0); 
61 
62 /* 
63 * Create 5 threads to wait on a semaphore. 
64 */ 
65 for (thread_count = 0; thread_count < 5; thread_count++) { 
66 status = pthread_create ( 
67 &sem_waiters[thread_count], NULL, 
68 sem_waiter, (void*)thread_count); 
69 if (status != 0) 
70 err_abort (status, "Create thread"); 
71 } 
72 
73 /* 
74 * Set up a repeating timer using signal number SIGRTMIN, 
75 * set to occur every 2 seconds. 
76 */ 
77 sig_event.sigev_value.sival_int = 0; 
78 sig_event.sigev_signo = SIGRTMIN; 
79 sig_event.sigev_notify = SIGEV_SIGNAL; 
240 CHAPTER 6 POSIX adjusts to threads 
80 if (timer_create (CLOCK_REALTIME, &sig_event, &timer_id) == -1) 
81 errno_abort ("Create timer"); 
82 sigemptyset (&sig_mask); 
83 sigaddset (&sig_mask, SIGRTMIN); 
84 sig_action.sa_handler = signal_catcher; 
85 sig_action.sa_mask = sig_mask; 
86 sig_action.sa_flags = 0; 
87 if (sigaction (SIGRTMIN, &sig_action, NULL) == -1) 
88 errno_abort ("Set signal action"); 
89 timer_val.it_interval.tv_sec = 2; 
90 timer_val.it_interval.tv_nsec = 0; 
91 timer_val.it_value.tv_sec = 2 ; 
92 timer_val.it_value.tv_nsec = 0; 
93 if (timer_settime (timer_id, 0, &timer_val, NULL) == -1) 
94 errno_abort ("Set timer"); 
95 
96 /* 
97 * Wait for all threads to complete. 
98 */ 
99 for (thread_count = 0; thread_count < 5; thread_count++) { 
100 status = pthread_join (sem_waiters[thread_count], NULL); 
101 if (status != 0) 
102 err_abort (status, "Join thread"); 
103 } 
104 return 0; 
105 #endif 
106 } 
| semaphore signal.c 
7 "Real code" 
"When we were still little," the Mock Turtle went on at last, more calmly, 
though still sobbing a little now and then, "we went to school in the sea. 
The master was an old Turtle！we used to call him Tortoise！" 
"Why did you call him Tortoise, if he wasn't one?" Alice asked. 
"We called him Tortoise because he taught us," said the 
Mock Turtle angrily. 
！Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking-Glass 
This section builds on most of the earlier sections of the book, but principal!;. 
on the mutex and condition variable sections. You should already understar.c 
how to create both types of synchronization objects and how they work. I wl! 
demonstrate the design and construction of barrier and read/ write lock synchr: 
nization mechanisms that are built from mutexes, condition variables, arc ; 
dash of data. Both barriers and read/write locks are in common use. and ha.-; 
been proposed for standardization in the near future. I will follow up with a -.j-:~- 
queue server that lets you parcel out tasks to a pool of threads. 
The purpose of all this is to teach you more about the subtleties of usir.i. a. 
these new threaded programming tools (that is, mutexes, condition variables ar.: 
threads). The library packages may be useful to you as is or as templates. Pnrr.ar 
ily, though, they are here to give me something to talk about in this section, ar. z 
have omitted some complication that may be valuable in real code. The err:: 
detection and recovery code, for example, is fairly primitive. 
7.1 Extended synchronization 
Mutexes and condition variables are flexible and efficient synchronization 
tools. You can build just about any form of synchronization you need using those 
two things. But you shouldn't build them from scratch every time you need them. 
It is nice to start with a general, modular implementation that doesn't need to be 
debugged every time. This section shows some common and useful tools that you 
won't have to redesign every time you write an application that needs them. 
First we'll build a barrier. The function of a barrier is about what you might 
guess！it stops threads. A barrier is initialized to stop a certain number of 
threads！when the required number of threads have reached the barrier, all are 
allowed to continue. 
241 
242 
CHAPTER 7 "Real code" 
Then we'll build something called a read/write lock. A read/write lock allows 
multiple threads to read data simultaneously, but prevents any thread from mod- 
ifying data that is being read or modified by another thread. 
7.1.1 Barriers 
A barrier is a way to keep the members of a group together. If our intrepid 
"bailing programmers" washed up on a deserted island, for example, and they 
ventured into the jungle to explore, they would want to remain together, for the 
illusion of safety in numbers, if for no other reason (Figure 7.1). Any exploring 
programmer finding himself very far in front of the others would therefore wait 
for them before continuing. 
A barrier is usually employed to ensure that all threads cooperating in some 
parallel algorithm reach a specific point in that algorithm before any can pass. 
This is especially common in code that has been decomposed automatically by 
creating fine-grained parallelism within compiled source code. All threads may 
execute the same code, with threads processing separate portions of a shared 
data set (such as an array) in some areas and processing private data in parallel 
FIGURE 7.1 Barrier analogy 
Extended synchronization 
243 
in other areas. Still other areas must be executed by only one thread, such as 
setup or cleanup for the parallel regions. The boundaries between these areas are 
often implemented using barriers. Thus, threads completing a matrix computa- 
tion may wait at a barrier until all have finished. One may then perform setup for 
the next parallel segment while the others skip ahead to another barrier. When the 
setup thread reaches that barrier, all threads begin the next parallel region. 
Figure 7.2 shows the operation of a barrier being used to synchronize three 
threads, called thread 1, thread 2, and thread 3. The figure is a sort of timing dia- 
gram, with time increasing from left to right. Each of the lines beginning at the 
labels in the upper left designates the behavior of a specific thread！solid for 
thread 1, dotted for thread 2, and dashed for thread 3. When the lines drop 
within the rounded rectangle, they are interacting with the barrier. If the line 
drops below the center line, it shows that the thread is blocked waiting for other 
threads to reach the barrier. The line that stops above the center line represents 
the final thread to reach the barrier, awakening all waiters. 
In this example, thread 1 and then thread 2 wait on the barrier. At a later 
time, thread 3 waits on the barrier, finds that the barrier is now full, and awakens 
all the waiters. All three threads then return from the barrier wait. 
The core of a barrier is a counter. The counter is initialized to the number of 
threads in the "tour group," the number of threads that must wait on a barrier 
before all the waiters return. I'll call that the "threshold," to give it a simple one- 
word name. When each thread reaches the barrier, it decreases the counter. If the 
value hasn't reached 0, it waits. If the value has reached 0, it wakes up the wait- 
ing threads. 
thread 1 waits ！? 
thread 1 
thread 2 
thread 3 
time: 
'barrier 
thread 3 waits, 
releasing all three 
2 
thread 2 and / 
thread 3 wake 
FIGURE 7.2 Barrier operation 
244 CHAPTER 7 "Real code' 
Because the counter will be modified by multiple threads, it has to be pro- 
tected by a mutex. Because threads will be waiting for some event (a counter value 
of 0), the barrier needs to have a condition variable and a predicate expression. 
When the counter reaches 0 and the barrier drops open, we need to reset the 
counter, which means the barrier must store the original threshold. 
The obvious predicate is to simply wait for the counter to reach 0, but that 
complicates the process of resetting the barrier. When can we reset the count to 
the original value? We can't reset it when the counter reaches 0, because at that 
point most of the threads are waiting on the condition variable. The counter must 
be 0 when they wake up, or they'll continue waiting. Remember that condition 
variable waits occur in loops that retest the predicate. 
The best solution is to add a separate variable for the predicate. We will use a 
"cycle" variable that is logically inverted each time some thread determines that 
one cycle of the barrier is complete. That is, whenever the counter value is reset, 
before broadcasting the condition variable, the thread inverts the cycle flag. 
Threads wait in a loop as long as the cycle flag remains the same as the value 
seen on entry, which means that each thread must save the initial value. 
The header file barrier.h and the C source file barrier.c demonstrate an 
implementation of barriers using standard Pthreads mutexes and condition vari- 
ables. This is a portable implementation that is relatively easy to understand. 
One could, of course, create a much more efficient implementation for any spe- 
cific system based on knowledge of nonportable hardware and operating system 
characteristics. 
6-13 Part 1 shows the structure of a barrier, represented by the type barrier_t. 
You can see the mutex (mutex) and the condition variable (cv). The threshhold 
member is the number of threads in the group, whereas counter is the number of 
threads that have yet to join the group at the barrier. And cycle is the flag dis- 
cussed in the previous paragraph. It is used to ensure that a thread awakened 
from a barrier wait will immediately return to the caller, but will block in the bar- 
rier if it calls the wait operation again before all threads have resumed execution. 
15 The barrier_valid macro defines a "magic number," which we store into the 
valid member and then check to determine whether an address passed to other 
barrier interfaces is "reasonably likely to be" a barrier. This is an easy, quick 
check that will catch the most common errors. 
* I always like to define magic numbers using hexadecimal constants that can be pronounced 
as English words. For barriers, I invented my own restaurant called the "DB cafe," or, in C syntax, 
Oxdbcaf e. Many interesting (or at least mildly amusing) English words can be spelled using only 
the letters a through/ There are even more possibilities if you allow the digit 1 to stand in for the 
letter 1. and the digit 0 to stand in for the letter o. (Whether you like the results will depend a lot 
on the typeface in which you commonly read your code.) 
Extended synchronization 
245 
barrier.h 
part 1 barrier_t 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
#include <pthread.h> 
/* 
* Structure describing a barrier. 
*/ 
typedef struct barrier tag { 
pthread_mutex_t 
pthread_cond_t 
int 
int 
int 
int 
barrier t; 
mutex; 
cv; 
valid; 
threshold; 
counter; 
cycle; 
#define BARRIER VALID Oxdbcafe 
/* Control access to barrier */ 
/* wait for barrier */ 
/* set when valid */ 
/* number of threads required */ 
/* current number of threads */ 
/* alternate cycles @ or 1) */ 
barrier.h 
part 1 barrier_t 
Part 2 shows definitions and prototypes that allow you to do something with 
the barrier_t structure. First, you will want to initialize a new barrier. 
4-6 You can initialize a static barrier at compile time by using the macro barrier_ 
INITIALIZER. You can instead dynamically initialize a barrier by calling the func- 
tion barrier_init. 
11-13 Once you have initialized a barrier, you will want to be able to use it. and the 
main thing to be done with a barrier is to wait on it. When we're done with a bar- 
rier, it would be nice to be able to destroy the barrier and reclaim the resources it 
used. We'll call these operations barrier_init, barrier_wait, and barrier_ 
destroy. All the operations need to specify upon which barrier they will operate. 
Because barriers are synchronization objects, and contain both a mutex and a 
condition variable (neither of which can be copied), we always pass a pointer to a 
barrier. Only the initialization operation requires a second parameter, the num- 
ber of waiters required before the barrier opens. 
To be consistent with Pthreads conventions, the functions all return an inte- 
ger value, representing an error number defined in <errno.h>. The value 0 
represents success. 
barrier.h 
part 2 interfaces 
/* 
* Support static initialization of barriers. 
*/ 
#define BARRIER_INITIALIZER(cnt) \ 
{PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER, PTHREAD_COND_INITIALIZER, \ 
BARRIER_VALID, cnt, cnt, 0} 
246 CHAPTER 7 "Real code" 
8 /* 
9 * Define barrier functions 
10 */ 
11 extern int barrier_init (barrier_t *barrier, int count); 
12 extern int barrier_destroy (barrier_t *barrier); 
13 extern int barrier_wait (barrier_t *barrier); 
| barrier.h part 2 interfaces 
Now that you know the interface definition, you could write a program using 
barriers. But then, the point of this section is not to tell you how to use barriers, 
but to help improve your understanding of threaded programming by showing 
how to build a barrier. The following examples show the functions provided by 
barrier. c, to implement the interfaces we've just seen in barrier. h. 
Part 1 shows barrier_init, which you would call to dynamically initialize a 
barrier, for example, if you allocate a barrier with malloc. 
12 Both the counter and threshold are set to the same value. The counter is the 
"working counter" and will be reset to threshold for each barrier cycle. 
14-16 If mutex initialization fails, barrier_init returns the failing status to the 
caller. 
17-21 If condition variable (cv) initialization fails, barrier_init destroys the mutex 
it had already created and returns the failure status！the status of pthread_ 
mutex_destroy is ignored because the failure to create the condition variable is 
more important than the failure to destroy the mutex. 
22 The barrier is marked valid only after all initialization is complete. This does 
not completely guarantee that another thread erroneously trying to wait on that 
barrier will detect the invalid barrier rather than failing in some less easily diag- 
nosable manner, but at least it is a token attempt. 
| barrier.c part 1 barrier_init 
1 #include <pthread.h> 
2 #include "errors.h" 
3 #include "barrier.h" 
4 
5 /* 
6 * Initialize a barrier for use. 
7 */ 
8 int barrier_init (barrier_t *barrier, int count) 
9 { 
10 int status; 
11 
12 barrier->threshold = barrier->counter = count; 
13 barrier->cycle = 0; 
14 status = pthread_mutex_init (&barrier->mutex, NULL); 
15 if (status != 0) 
16 return status; 
17 status = pthread cond init (&barrier->cv, NULL); 
Extended synchronization 247 
18 if (status != 0) { 
19 pthread_mutex_destroy (&barrier->mutex); 
20 return status; 
21 } 
22 barrier->valid = BARRIER_VALID; 
23 return 0 ; 
24 } 
| barrier.c part 1 barrier_init 
Part 2 shows the barrier_destroy function, which destroys the mutex and 
condition variable (cv) in the barrier_t structure. If we had allocated any addi- 
tional resources for the barrier, we would need to release those resources also. 
8-9 First check that the barrier appears to be valid, and initialized, by looking at 
the valid member. We don't lock the mutex first, because that will fail, possibly 
with something nasty like a segmentation fault, if the mutex has been destroyed 
or hasn't been initialized. Because we do not lock the mutex first, the validation 
check is not entirely reliable, but it is better than nothing, and will only fail to 
detect some race conditions where one thread attempts to destroy a barrier while 
another is initializing it, or where two threads attempt to destroy a barrier at 
nearly the same time. 
19-22 If any thread is currently waiting on the barrier, return ebusy. 
24-27 At this point, the barrier is "destroyed"！all that's left is cleanup. To minimize 
the chances of confusing errors should another thread try to wait on the barrier 
before we're done, mark the barrier "not valid" by clearing valid, before changing 
any other state. Then, unlock the mutex, since we cannot destroy it while it :=? 
locked. 
33-35 Destroy the mutex and condition variable. If the mutex destruction fads 
return the status; otherwise, return the status of the condition variable destruc - 
tion. Or, to put it another way, return an error status if either destruction failed 
otherwise, return success. 
| barrier.c part 2 barrier_destrcy 
1 /* 
2 * Destroy a barrier when done using it. 
3 */ 
4 int barrier_destroy (barrier_t *barrier) 
5 { 
6 int status, status2; 
7 
8 if (barrier->valid != BARRIER_VALID) 
9 return EINVAL; 
10 
11 status = pthread_mutex_lock (&barrier->mutex); 
12 if (status != 0) 
13 return status; 
14 
248 CHAPTER 7 "Real code" 
15 /* 
16 * Check whether any threads are known to be waiting; report 
17 * "BUSY" if so. 
18 */ 
19 if (barrier->counter != barrier->threshold) { 
20 pthread_mutex_unlock (&barrier->mutex); 
21 return EBUSY; 
22 } 
23 
24 barrier->valid = 0; 
25 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (&barrier->mutex); 
26 if (status != 0) 
27 return status; 
28 
29 /* 
30 * If unable to destroy either 1003.1c synchronization 
31 * object, return the error status. 
32 */ 
33 status = pthread_mutex_destroy (&barrier->mutex); 
34 status2 = pthread_cond_destroy (&barrier->cv); 
35 return (status == 0 ? status : status2); 
36 } 
| barrier.c part 2 barrier_destroy 
Finally, part 3 shows the implementation of barrier_wait. 
10-n First we verify that the argument barrier appears to be a valid barrier_t. We 
perform this check before locking the mutex, so that barrier_destroy can safely 
destroy the mutex once it has cleared the valid member. This is a simple attempt 
to minimize the damage if one thread attempts to wait on a barrier while another 
thread is simultaneously either initializing or destroying that barrier. 
We cannot entirely avoid problems, since without the mutex, barrier_wait 
has no guarantee that it will see the correct (up-to-date) value of valid. The valid 
check may succeed when the barrier is being made invalid, or fail when the bar- 
rier is being made valid. Locking the mutex first would do no good, because the 
mutex may not exist if the barrier is not fully initialized, or if it is being destroyed. 
This isn't a problem as long as you use the barrier correctly！that is, you initialize 
the barrier before any thread can possibly try to use it, and do not destroy the 
barrier until you are sure no thread will try to use it again. 
17 Copy the current value of the barrier's cycle into a local variable. The com- 
parison of our local cycle against the barrier_t structure's cycle member 
becomes our condition wait predicate. The predicate ensures that all currently 
waiting threads will return from barrier_wait when the last waiter broadcasts 
the condition variable, but that any thread that calls barrier_wait again will 
wait for the next broadcast. (This is the "tricky part" of correctly implementing a 
barrier.) 
Extended synchronization 249 
19-22 Now we decrease counter, which is the number of threads that are required 
but haven't yet waited on the barrier. When counter reaches 0, no more threads 
are needed！they're all here and waiting anxiously to continue to the next attrac- 
tion. Now all we need to do is tell them to wake up. We advance to the next cycle, 
reset the counter, and broadcast the barrier's condition variable. 
28-29 Earlier, I mentioned that a program often needs one thread to perform some 
cleanup or setup between parallel regions. Each thread could lock a mutex and 
check a flag so that only one thread would perform the setup. However, the setup 
may not need additional synchronization, for example, because the other threads 
will wait at a barrier for the next parallel region, and, in that case, it would be 
nice to avoid locking an extra mutex. 
The barrier_wait function has this capability built into it. One and only one 
thread will return with the special value of -1 while the others return 0. In this 
particular implementation, the one that waits last and wakes the others will take 
the honor, but in principle it is "unspecified" which thread returns -1. The thread 
that receives -1 can perform the setup, while others race ahead. If you do not 
need the special return status, treat -1 as another form of success. The proposed 
POSIX. lj standard has a similar capability！one (unspecified) thread completing 
a barrier will return the status barrier_serial_thread. 
3 5 Any threaded code that uses condition variables should always either support 
deferred cancellation or disable cancellation. Remember that there are two dis- 
tinct types of cancellation: deferred and asynchronous. Code that deals with 
asynchronous cancellation is rare. In general it is difficult or impossible to sup- 
port asynchronous cancellation in any code that acquires resources (including 
locking a mutex). Programmers can't assume any function supports asynchro- 
nous cancellation unless its documentation specifically says so. Therefore we do 
not need to worry about asynchronous cancellation. 
We could code barrier_wait to deal with deferred cancellation, but that 
raises difficult questions. How, for example, will the barrier wait ever be satisfied 
if one of the threads has been canceled? And if it won't be satisfied, what happens 
to all the other threads that have already waited (or are about to wait) on that 
barrier? There are various ways to answer these questions. One would be for 
barrier_wait to record the thread identifiers of all threads waiting on the bar- 
rier, and for any thread that's canceled within the wait to cancel all other waiters. 
Or we might handle cancellation by setting some special error flag and broad- 
casting the condition variable, and modifying barrier_wait to return a special 
error when awakened in that way. However, it makes little sense to cancel one 
thread that's using a barrier. We're going to disallow it, by disabling cancellation 
prior to the wait, and restoring the previous state of cancellation afterward. This 
is the same approach taken by the proposed POSIX. lj standard, by the way！bar- 
rier waits are not cancellation points. 
42-46 If there are more threads that haven't reached the barrier, we need to wait for 
them. We do that by waiting on the condition variable until the barrier has 
advanced to the next cycle！that is, the barrier's cycle no longer matches the 
local copy. 
250 CHAPTER 7 "Real code" 
| barrier.c part 3 barrier_wait 
1 /* 
2 * Wait for all members of a barrier to reach the barrier. When 
3 * the count (of remaining members) reaches 0, broadcast to wake 
4 * all threads waiting. 
5 */ 
6 int barrier_wait (barrier_t *barrier) 
7 { 
8 int status, cancel, tmp, cycle; 
9 
10 if (barrier->valid != BARRIER_VALID) 
11 return EINVAL; 
12 
13 status = pthread_mutex_lock (&barrier->mutex); 
14 if (status != 0) 
15 return status; 
16 
17 cycle = barrier->cycle; /* Remember which cycle we're on */ 
18 
19 if (！barrier->counter ==0) { 
20 barrier->cycle = !barrier->cycle; 
21 barrier->counter = barrier->threshold; 
22 status = pthread_cond_broadcast (&barrier->cv); 
23 /* 
24 * The last thread into the barrier will return status 
25 * -1 rather than 0, so that it can be used to perform 
26 * some special serial code following the barrier. 
27 */ 
28 if (status == 0) 
29 status = -1; 
30 } else { 
31 /* 
32 * Wait with cancellation disabled, because barrier_wait 
33 * should not be a cancellation point. 
34 */ 
35 pthread_setcancelstate (PTHREAD_CANCEL_DISABLE, scancel); 
36 
37 /* 
38 * Wait until the barrier's cycle changes, which means 
39 * that it has been broadcast, and we don't want to wait 
40 * anymore. 
41 */ 
42 while (cycle == barrier->cycle) { 
43 status = pthread_cond_wait ( 
44 &barrier->cv, &barrier->mutex); 
45 if (status != 0) break; 
46 } 
47 
Extended synchronization 251 
48 pthread_setcancelstate (cancel, &tmp); 
49 } 
50 /* 
51 * Ignore an error in unlocking. It shouldn't happen, and 
52 * reporting it here would be misleading ！ the barrier wait 
53 * completed, after all, whereas returning, for example, 
54 * EINVAL would imply the wait had failed. The next attempt 
55 * to use the barrier *will* return an error, or hang, due 
56 * to whatever happened to the mutex. 
57 */ 
58 pthread_mutex_unlock (&barrier->mutex); 
59 return status; /* error, -1 for waker, or 0 */ 
60 } 
| barrier.c part 3 barrier_wait 
Finally, barrier_main.c is a simple program that uses barriers. Each thread 
loops on calculations within a private array. 
35,47 At the beginning and end of each iteration, the threads, running function 
thread_routine, all wait on a barrier to synchronize the operation. 
56-61 At the end of each iteration, the "lead thread" (the one receiving a -1 result 
from barrier_wait) will modify the data of all threads, preparing them for the 
next iteration. The others go directly to the top of the loop and wait on the barrier 
at line 35. 
| barrier_main.c 
1 #include <pthread.h> 
2 #include "barrier.h" 
3 #include "errors.h" 
4 
5 #define THREADS 5 
6 #define ARRAY 6 
7 #define INLOOPS 1000 
8 #define OUTLOOPS 10 
9 
10 /* 
11 * Keep track of each thread. 
12 */ 
13 typedef struct thread_tag { 
14 pthread_t thread_id; 
15 int number; 
16 int increment; 
17 int array[ARRAY]; 
18 } thread_t; 
19 
20 barrier_t barrier; 
21 thread_t thread[THREADS]; 
22 
252 CHAPTER 7 "Real code" 
23 /* 
24 * Start routine for threads. 
25 */ 
26 void *thread_routine (void *arg) 
27 { 
28 thread_t *self = (thread_t*)arg; /* Thread's thread_t */ 
29 int in_loop, out_loop, count, status; 
30 
31 /* 
32 * Loop through OUTLOOPS barrier cycles. 
33 */ 
34 for (out_loop = 0; out_loop < OUTLOOPS; out_loop++) { 
35 status = barrier_wait (Sbarrier); 
36 if (status > 0) 
37 err_abort (status, "Wait on barrier"); 
38 
39 /* 
40 * This inner loop just adds a value to each element in 
41 * the working array. 
42 */ 
43 for (in_loop = 0; in_loop < INLOOPS; in_loop++) 
44 for (count = 0; count < ARRAY; count++) 
45 self->array[count] += self->increment; 
46 
47 status = barrier_wait (Sbarrier); 
48 if (status > 0) 
49 err_abort (status, "Wait on barrier"); 
50 
51 /* 
52 * The barrier causes one thread to return with the 
53 * special return status -1. The thread receiving this 
54 * value increments each element in the shared array. 
55 */ 
56 if (status == -1) { 
57 int thread_num; 
58 
59 for (thread_num = 0; thread_num < THREADS; thread_num++) 
60 thread[thread_num].increment += 1; 
61 } 
62 > 
63 return NULL; 
64 } 
65 
66 int main (int arg, char *argv[]) 
67 { 
68 int thread_count, array_count; 
69 int status; 
70 
71 barrier_init (Sbarrier, THREADS); 
72 
Extended synchronization 253 
73 /* 
74 * Create a set of threads that will use the barrier. 
75 */ 
76 for (thread_count = 0; thread_count < THREADS; thread_count++) { 
77 thread[thread_count].increment = thread_count; 
78 thread[thread_count].number = thread_count; 
79 
80 for (array_count = 0; array_count < ARRAY; array_count++) 
81 thread[thread_count].array[array_count] = array_count + 1; 
82 
83 status = pthread_create (&thread[thread_count].thread_id, 
84 NULL, thread_routine, (void*)&thread[thread_count]); 
85 if (status != 0) 
86 err_abort (status, "Create thread"); 
87 } 
88 
89 /* 
90 * Now join with each of the threads. 
91 */ 
92 for (thread_count = 0; thread_count < THREADS; thread_count++) { 
93 status = pthread_join (thread[thread_count].thread_id, NULL); 
94 if (status != 0) 
95 err_abort (status, "Join thread"); 
96 
97 printf ("%02d: (%d) ", 
98 thread_count, thread[thread_count].increment); 
99 ~ 
100 for (array_count = 0; array_count < ARRAY; array_count++) 
101 printf ("%010u ", 
102 thread[thread_count].array[array_count]); 
103 printf ("\n"); 
104 } 
105 
106 /* 
107 * To be thorough, destroy the barrier. 
108 */ 
109 barrier_destroy (sbarrier); 
110 return 0; 
111 } 
| barrier main.c 
7.1.2 Read/write locks 
A read/write lock is a lot like a mutex. It is another way to prevent more than 
one thread from modifying shared data at the same time. But unlike a mutex it 
distinguishes between reading data and writing data. A mutex excludes all other 
threads, while a read/write lock allows more than one thread to read the data, as 
long as none of them needs to change it. 
254 
CHAPTER 7 "Real code" 
Read/write locks are used to protect information that you need to read fre- 
quently but usually don't need to modify. For example, when you build a cache of 
recently accessed information, many threads may simultaneously examine the 
cache without conflict. When a thread needs to update the cache, it must have 
exclusive access. 
When a thread locks a read/write lock, it chooses shared read access or exclu- 
sive write access. A thread that wants read access can't continue while any thread 
currently has write access. A thread trying to gain write access can't continue 
when another thread currently has either write access or read access. 
When both readers and writers are waiting for access at the same time, the 
readers are given precedence when the write lock is released. Read precedence 
favors concurrency because it potentially allows many threads to accomplish 
work simultaneously. Write precedence on the other hand would ensure that 
pending modifications to the shared data are completed before the data is used. 
There's no absolute right or wrong policy, and if you don't find the implementa- 
tion here appropriate for you, it is easy to change. 
Figure 7.3 shows the operation of a read/write lock being used to synchronize 
three threads, called thread 1, thread 2, and thread 3. The figure is a sort of tim- 
ing diagram, with time increasing from left to right. Each of the lines beginning at 
the labels in the upper left designates the behavior of a specific thread！solid for 
thread 1, dotted for thread 2, and dashed for thread 3. When the lines drop 
within the rounded rectangle, they are interacting with the read/write lock. If the 
thread 2 waits 
for read lock 
thread 1 locks 
for write 
r thread 1 unlocks 
thread 3 unlocks 
thread 1 (writer) 
thread 2 (reader) 
thread 3 (reader) 
time: 
/render/writer 
lock 
thread 2 locks 
for read 
thread 1 waits 
for write lock 
thread 3 locks 
for read 
thread 1 locks 
for write 
FIGURE 7.3 Read/write lock operation 
Extended synchronization 255 
line drops below the center line, it shows that the thread has the read/write lock 
locked, either for exclusive write or for shared read. Lines that hover above the 
center line represent threads waiting for the lock. 
In this example, thread 1 locks the read/write lock for exclusive write. Thread 2 
tries to lock the read/write lock for shared read and, finding it already locked for 
exclusive write, blocks. When thread 1 releases the lock, it awakens thread 2, 
which then succeeds in locking the read/write lock for shared read. Thread 3 
then tries to lock the read/write lock for shared read and, because the read/write 
lock is already locked for shared read, it succeeds immediately. Thread 1 then 
tries to lock the read/write lock again for exclusive write access, and blocks 
because the read/write lock is already locked for read access. When thread 3 
unlocks the read/write lock, it cannot awaken thread 1, because there is another 
reader. Only when thread 2 also unlocks the read/write lock, and the lock 
becomes unlocked, can thread 1 be awakened to lock the read/write lock for 
exclusive write access. 
The header file rwlock. h and the C source file rwlock. c demonstrate an imple- 
mentation of read/write locks using standard Pthreads mutexes and condition 
variables. This is a portable implementation that is relatively easy to understand. 
One could, of course, create a much more efficient implementation for any specific 
system based on knowledge of nonportable hardware and operating system 
characteristics. 
The rest of this section shows the details of a read/write lock package. First, 
rwlock. h describes the interfaces, and then rwlock. c provides the implementa- 
tion. Part 1 shows the structure of a read/write lock, represented by the type 
rwlock_t. 
7-9 Of course, there's a mutex to serialize access to the structure. We'll use two 
separate condition variables, one to wait for read access (called read) and one to 
wait for write access (called, surprisingly, write). 
10 The rwlock_t structure has a valid member to easily detect common usage 
errors, such as trying to lock a read/write lock that hasn't been initialized. The 
member is set to a magic number when the read/write lock is initialized, just as 
in barrier_init. 
11-12 To enable us to determine whether either condition variable has waiters, we'll 
keep a count of active readers (r_active) and a flag to indicate an active writer 
(w_active). 
13-14 We also keep a count of the number of threads waiting for read access (r_wait) 
and for write access (wwait). 
17 Finally, we need a "magic number" for our valid member. (See the footnote in 
Section 7.1.1 if you missed this part of the barrier example.) 
| rwlock.h part 1 rwlock_t 
1 #include <pthread.h> 
2 
3 /* 
4 * Structure describing a read/write lock. 
5 */ 
256 CHAPTER 7 "Real code" 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
typedef struct rwlock 
pthread mutex t 
pthread cond t 
pthread cond t 
int 
int 
int 
int 
int 
} rwlock t; 
#define RWLOCK_VALID 
_tag { 
mutex; 
read; 
write; 
valid; 
r active; 
w active; 
r wait; 
w wait; 
Oxfacade 
/* 
/* 
/* 
/* 
/* 
/* 
/* 
wait for read */ 
wait for write */ 
set when valid */ 
readers active */ 
writer active */ 
readers waiting */ 
writers waiting */ 
rwlock.h part 1 rwlock_t 
We could have saved some space and simplified the code by using a single 
condition variable, with readers and writers waiting using separate predicate 
expressions. We will use one condition variable for each predicate, because it is 
more efficient. This is a common trade-off. The main consideration is that when 
two predicates share a condition variable, you must always wake them using 
pthread_cond_broadcast, which would mean waking all waiters each time the 
read/write lock is unlocked. 
We keep track of a boolean variable for "writer active," since there can only be 
one. There are also counters for "readers active," "readers waiting," and "writers 
waiting." We could get by without counters for readers and writers waiting. All 
readers are awakened simultaneously using a broadcast, so it doesn't matter how 
many there are. Writers are awakened only if there are no readers, so we could 
dispense with keeping track of whether there are any threads waiting to write (at 
the cost of an occasional wasted condition variable signal when there are no 
waiters). 
We count the number of threads waiting for read access because the condition 
variable waits might be canceled. Without cancellation, we could use a simple 
flag！"threads are waiting for read" or "no threads are waiting for read." Each 
thread could set it before waiting, and we could clear it before broadcasting to 
wake all waiting readers. However, because we can't count the threads waiting on 
a condition variable, we wouldn't know whether to clear that flag when a waiting 
reader was canceled. This information is critical, because if there are no readers 
waiting when the read/write lock is unlocked, we must wake a writer！but we 
cannot wake a writer if there are waiting readers. A count of waiting readers, 
which we can decrease when a waiter is canceled, solves the problem. 
The consequences of "getting it wrong" are less important for writers than for 
readers. Because we check for readers first, we don't really need to know whether 
there are writers. We could signal a "potential writer" anytime the read/write lock 
was released with no waiting readers. But counting waiting writers allows us to 
avoid a condition variable signal when no threads are waiting. 
Part 2 shows the rest of the definitions and the function prototypes. 
Extended synchronization 257 
4-6 The rwlock_initializer macro allows you to statically initialize a read/write 
lock. 
n-18 Of course, you must also be able to initialize a read/write lock that you cannot 
allocate statically, so we provide rwl_init to initialize dynamically, and rwl_ 
destroy to destroy a read/write lock once you're done with it. In addition, there 
are functions to lock and unlock the read/write lock for either read or write 
access. You can "try to lock" a read/write lock, either for read or write access, by 
calling rwl_readtrylock or rwl_writetrylock., just as you can try to lock a 
mutex by calling pthread_mutex_trylock. 
| rwlock.h part 2 interfaces 
1 /* 
2 * Support static initialization of barriers. 
3 */ 
4 #define RWL_INITIALIZER \ 
5 {PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER, PTHREAD_COND_INITIALIZER, \ 
6 PTHREAD_COND_INITIALIZER, RWLOCK_VALID, 0, 0, 0, 0} 
7 
8 /* 
9 * Define read/write lock functions. 
10 */ 
11 extern int rwl_init (rwlock_t *rwlock); 
12 extern int rwl_destroy (rwlock_t *rwlock); 
13 extern int rwl_readlock (rwlock_t *rwlock); 
14 extern int rwl_readtrylock (rwlock_t *rwlock); 
15 extern int rwl_readunlock (rwlock_t Twlock); 
16 extern int rwl_writelock (rwlock_t *rwlock); 
17 extern int rwl_writetrylock (rwlock_t *rwlock); 
18 extern int rwl_writeunlock (rwlock_t *rwlock); 
| rwlock.h part 2 interfaces 
The file rwlock. c contains the implementation of read/write locks. The follow- 
ing examples break down each of the functions used to implement the rwlock.h 
interfaces. 
Part 1 shows rwl_init, which initializes a read/write lock. It initializes the 
Pthreads synchronization objects, initializes the counters and flags, and finally 
sets the valid sentinel to make the read/write lock recognizable to the other 
interfaces. If we are unable to initialize the read condition variable, we destroy 
the mutex that we'd already created. Similarly, if we are unable to initialize the 
write condition variable, we destroy both the mutex and the read condition 
variable. 
| rwlock.c part 1 rwl_init 
1 #include <pthread.h> 
2 #include "errors.h" 
258 CHAPTER 7 "Real code" 
3 #include "rwlock.h" 
4 
5 /* 
6 * Initialize a read/write lock. 
7 */ 
8 int rwl_init (rwlock_t *rwl) 
9 { 
10 int status; 
11 
12 rwl->r_active = 0; 
13 rwl->r_wait = rwl->w_wait = 0; 
14 rwl->w_active = 0; 
15 status = pthread_mutex_init (&rwl->mutex, NULL); 
16 if (status != 0) 
17 return status; 
18 status = pthread_cond_init (&rwl->read, NULL); 
19 if (status != 0) { 
20 /* if unable to create read CV, destroy mutex */ 
21 pthread_mutex_destroy (&rwl->mutex); 
22 return status; 
23 } 
24 status = pthread_cond_init (&rwl->write, NULL); 
25 if (status != 0) { 
26 /* if unable to create write CV, destroy read CV and mutex */ 
27 pthread_cond_destroy (&rwl->read); 
28 pthread_mutex_destroy (&rwl->mutex); 
29 return status; 
30 } 
31 rwl->valid = RWLOCK_VALID; 
32 return 0; 
33 } 
| rwlock.c part 1 rwl_init 
Part 2 shows the rwl_destroy function, which destroys a read/write lock. 
8-9 We first try to verify that the read/write lock was properly initialized by check- 
ing the valid member. This is not a complete protection against incorrect usage, 
but it is cheap, and it will catch some of the most common errors. See the anno- 
tation for barrier .c, part 2, for more about how the valid member is used. 
10-30 Check whether the read/write lock is in use. We look for threads that are 
using or waiting for either read or write access. Using two separate if statements 
makes the test slightly more readable, though there's no other benefit. 
36-39 As in barrier_destroy, we destroy all Pthreads synchronization objects, and 
store each status return. If any of the destruction calls fails, returning a nonzero 
value, rwl_destroy will return that status, and if they all succeed it will return 0 
for success. 
Extended synchronization 259 
| rwlock.c part 2 rwl_destroy 
1 /* 
2 * Destroy a read/write lock. 
3 */ 
4 int rwl_destroy (rwlock_t *rwl) 
5 { 
6 int status, statusl, status2; 
7 
8 if (rwl->valid != RWLOCK_VALID) 
9 return EINVAL; 
10 status = pthread_mutex_lock (&rwl->mutex); 
11 if (status != 0) 
12 return status; 
13 
14 /* 
15 * Check whether any threads own the lock; report "BUSY" if 
16 * so. 
17 */ 
18 if (rwl->r_active > 0 || rwl->w_active) { 
19 pthread_mutex_unlock (&rwl->mutex); 
20 return EBUSY; 
21 } 
22 
23 /* 
24 * Check whether any threads are known to be waiting; report 
25 * EBUSY if so. 
26 */ 
27 if (rwl->r_wait != 0 || rwl->w_wait != 0) { 
28 pthread_mutex_unlock (&rwl->mutex); 
29 return EBUSY; 
30 } 
31 
32 rwl->valid = 0; 
33 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (&rwl->mutex); 
34 if (status != 0) 
35 return status; 
36 status = pthread_mutex_destroy (&rwl->mutex); 
37 statusl = pthread_cond_destroy (&rwl->read); 
38 status2 = pthread_cond_destroy (&rwl->write); 
39 return (status == 0 ? status 
40 : (statusl == 0 ? statusl : status2)); 
41 } 
| rwlock.c part 2 rwl_destroy 
260 CHAPTER 7 "Real code" 
Part 3 shows the code for rwl_readcleanup and rwl_writecleanup, two can- 
cellation cleanup handlers used in locking the read/write lock for read and write 
access, respectively. As you may infer from this, read/write locks, unlike barriers, 
are cancellation points. When a wait is canceled, the waiter needs to decrease the 
count of threads waiting for either a read or write lock, as appropriate, and unlock 
the mutex. 
| rwlock.c part 3 cleanuphandlers 
1 /* 
2 * Handle cleanup when the read lock condition variable 
3 * wait is canceled. 
4 * 
5 * Simply record that the thread is no longer waiting, 
6 * and unlock the mutex. 
7 */ 
8 static void rwl_readcleanup (void *arg) 
9 { 
10 rwlock_t *rwl = (rwlock_t *)arg; 
11 
12 rwl->r_wait！; 
13 pthread_mutex_unlock (&rwl->mutex); 
14 } 
15 
16 /* 
17 * Handle cleanup when the write lock condition variable 
18 * wait is canceled. 
19 * 
20 * Simply record that the thread is no longer waiting, 
21 * and unlock the mutex. 
22 */ 
23 static void rwl_writecleanup (void *arg) 
24 { 
25 rwlock_t *rwl = (rwlock_t *)arg; 
26 
27 rwl->w_wait！; 
28 pthread_mutex_unlock (&rwl->mutex); 
29 } 
| rwlock.c part 3 cleanuphandlers 
10-26 Part 4 shows rwl_readlock, which locks a read/write lock for read access. If a 
writer is currently active (w_active is nonzero), we wait for it to broadcast the 
read condition variable. The r_wait member counts the number of threads wait- 
ing to read. This could be a simple boolean variable, except for one problem！ 
when a waiter is canceled, we need to know whether there are any remaining 
waiters. Maintaining a count makes this easy, since the cleanup handler only 
needs to decrease the count. 
Extended synchronization 261 
This is one of the places where the code must be changed to convert our read/ 
write lock from "reader preference" to "writer preference," should you choose to 
do that. To implement writer preference, a reader must block while there are 
waiting writers (w_wait > 0), not merely while there are active writers, as we do 
here. 
15,21 Notice the use of the cleanup handler around the condition wait. Also, notice 
that we pass the argument 0 to pthread_cleanup_pop so that the cleanup code is 
called only if the wait is canceled. We need to perform slightly different actions 
when the wait is not canceled. If the wait is not canceled, we need to increase the 
count of active readers before unlocking the mutex. 
| rwlock.c part 4 rwl_readlock 
1 /* 
2 * Lock a read/write lock for read access. 
3 */ 
4 int rwl_readlock (rwlock_t *rwl) 
5 { 
6 int status; 
7 
8 if (rwl->valid != RWLOCK_VALID) 
9 return EINVAL; 
10 status = pthread_mutex_lock (&rwl->mutex); 
11 if (status != 0) 
12 return status; 
13 if (rwl->w_active) { 
14 rwl->r_wait++; 
15 pthread_cleanup_push (rwl_readcleanup, (void*)rwl); 
16 while (rwl->w_active) { 
17 status = pthread_cond_wait (&rwl->read, &rwl->mutex); 
18 if (status != 0) 
19 break; 
20 } 
21 pthread_cleanup_pop @); 
22 rwl->r_wait--; 
23 } 
24 if (status == 0) 
25 rwl->r_active++; 
26 pthread_mutex_unlock (&rwl->mutex); 
27 return status; 
28 > 
| rwlock.c part 4 rwl_readlock 
Part 5 shows rwl_readtrylock. This function is nearly identical to rwl_read- 
lock, except that, instead of waiting for access if a writer is active, it returns 
ebusy. It doesn't need a cleanup handler, and has no need to increase the count 
of waiting readers. 
262 CHAPTER 7 "Real code" 
This function must also be modified to implement "writer preference" read/ 
write locks, by returning EBUSY when a writer is waiting, not just when a writer is 
active. 
| rwlock.c part 5 rwl_readtrylock 
1 /* 
2 * Attempt to lock a read/write lock for read access (don't 
3 * block if unavailable). 
4 */ 
5 int rwl_readtrylock (rwlock_t *rwl) 
6 { 
7 int status, status2; 
8 
9 if (rwl->valid != RWLOCK_VALID) 
10 return EINVAL; 
11 status = pthread_mutex_lock (&rwl->mutex); 
12 if (status != 0) 
13 return status; 
14 if (rwl->w_active) 
15 status = EBUSY; 
16 else 
17 rwl->r_active++; 
18 status2 = pthread_mutex_unlock (&rwl->mutex); 
19 return (status2 != 0 ? status2 : status); 
20 } 
| rwlock.c part 5 rwl_readtrylock 
13 Part 6 shows rwlreadunlock. This function essentially reverses the effect of 
rwl_readlock or rwl_tryreadlock, by decreasing the count of active readers 
(r_active). 
14-15 If there are no more active readers, and at least one thread is waiting for write 
access, signal the write condition variable to unblock one. Note that there is a 
race here, and whether you should be concerned about it depends on your notion 
of what should happen. If another thread that is interested in read access calls 
rwl_readlock or rwl_tryreadlock before the awakened writer can run, the reader 
may "win," despite the fact that we just selected a writer. 
Because our version of read/write locks has "reader preference," this is what 
we usually want to happen！the writer will determine that it has failed and will 
resume waiting. (It received a spurious wakeup.) If the implementation changes to 
prefer writers, the spurious wakeup will not occur, because the potential reader 
would have to block. The waiter we just unblocked cannot decrease w_wait until it 
actually claims the lock. 
Extended synchronization 263 
| rwlock.c part 6 rwl_readunlock 
1 /* 
2 * Unlock a read/write lock from read access. 
3 */ 
4 int rwl_readunlock (rwlock_t *rwl) 
5 { 
6 int status, status2; 
8 if (rwl->valid != RWLOCK_VALID) 
9 return EINVAL; 
10 status = pthread_mutex_lock (&rwl->mutex); 
11 if (status != 0) 
12 return status; 
13 rwl->r_active！; 
14 if (rwl->r_active == 0 && rwl->w_wait > 0) 
15 status = pthread_cond_signal (&rwl->write); 
16 status2 = pthread_mutex_unlock (&rwl->mutex); 
17 return (status2 == 0 ? status : status2); 
18 } 
| rwlock.c part 6 rwl_readunlock 
13 Part 7 shows rwl_writelock. This function is much like rwl_readlock, except 
for the predicate condition on the condition variable wait. In part 1, I explained 
that, to convert from "preferred read" to "preferred write," a potential reader would 
have to wait until there were no active or waiting writers, whereas currently it 
waits only for active writers. The predicate in rwlwritelock is the converse of 
that condition. Because we support "preferred read," in theory, we must wait here 
if there are any active or waiting readers. In fact, it is a bit simpler, because if there 
are any active readers, there cannot be any waiting readers！the whole point of a 
read/write lock is that multiple threads can have read access at the same time. 
On the other hand, we do have to wait if there are any active writers, because we 
allow only one writer at a time. 
25 Unlike ractive, which is a counter, wactive is treated as a boolean. Or is it 
a counter? There's really no semantic difference, since the value of 1 can be con- 
sidered a boolean true or a count of 1！there can be only one active writer at any 
time. 
m rwlock.c part 7 rwl_writelock 
1 /* 
2 * Lock a read/write lock for write access. 
3 */ 
4 int rwl_writelock (rwlock_t *rwl) 
264 CHAPTER 7 "Real code" 
5 { 
6 int status; 
7 
8 if (rwl->valid != RWLOCK_VALID) 
9 return EINVAL; 
10 status = pthread_mutex_lock (&rwl->mutex); 
11 if (status != 0) 
12 return status; 
13 if (rwl->w_active || rwl->r_active > 0) { 
14 rwl->w_wait++; 
15 pthread_cleanup_push (rwl_writecleanup, (void*)rwl); 
16 while (rwl->w_active || rwl->r_active > 0) { 
17 status = pthread_cond_wait (&rwl->write, &rwl->mutex); 
18 if (status != 0) 
19 break; 
20 } 
21 pthread_cleanup_pop @); 
22 rwl->w_wait！; 
23 } 
24 if (status == 0) 
25 rwl->w_active = 1; 
26 pthread_mutex_unlock (&rwl->mutex); 
27 return status; 
28 } 
| rwlock.c part 7 rwl_writelock 
Part 8 shows rwl_writetrylock. This function is much like rwl_writelock, 
except that it returns ebusy if the read/write lock is currently in use (either by a 
reader or by a writer) rather than waiting for it to become free. 
| rwlock.c part 8 rwl_writetrylock 
1 /* 
2 * Attempt to lock a read/write lock for write access. Don't 
3 * block if unavailable. 
4 */ 
5 int rwl_writetrylock (rwlock_t *rwl) 
6 { 
7 int status, status2; 
8 
9 if (rwl->valid != RWLOCK_VALID) 
10 return EINVAL; 
11 status = pthread_mutex_lock (&rwl->mutex); 
12 if (status != 0) 
13 return status; 
14 if (rwl->w_active || rwl->r_active > 0) 
15 status = EBUSY; 
Extended synchronization 265 
16 else 
17 rwl->w_active = 1; 
18 status2 = pthread_mutex_unlock (&rwl->mutex); 
19 return (status != 0 ? status : status2); 
20 } 
B rwlock.c part 8 rwl_writetrylock 
Finally, part 9 shows rwl_writeunlock. This function is called by a thread 
with a write lock, to release the lock. 
13-19 When a writer releases the read/write lock, it is always free; if there are any 
threads waiting for access, we must wake one. Because we implement "preferred 
read" access, we first look for threads that are waiting for read access. If there are 
any, we broadcast the read condition variable to wake them all. 
20-26 If there were no waiting readers, but there are one or more waiting writers, 
wake one of them by signaling the write condition variable. 
To implement a "preferred write" lock, you would reverse the two tests, waking 
a waiting writer, if any, before looking for waiting readers. 
| rwlock.c part 9 rwl_writeunlock 
1 /* 
2 * Unlock a read/write lock from write access. 
3 */ 
4 int rwl_writeunlock (rwlock_t *rwl) 
5 { 
6 int status; 
7 
8 if (rwl->valid != RWLOCK_VALID) 
9 return EINVAL; 
10 status = pthread_mutex_lock (&rwl->mutex); 
11 if (status != 0) 
12 return status; 
13 rwl->w_active = 0; 
14 if (rwl->r_wait > 0) { 
15 status = pthread_cond_broadcast (&rwl->read); 
16 if (status != 0) { 
17 pthread_mutex_unlock (&rwl->mutex); 
18 return status; 
19 } 
20 } else if (rwl->w_wait > 0) { 
21 status = pthread_cond_signal (&rwl->write); 
22 if (status != 0) { 
23 pthread_mutex_unlock (&rwl->mutex); 
24 return status; 
25 } 
26 } 
266 CHAPTER 7 "Real code" 
27 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (&rwl->mutex); 
28 return status; 
29 } 
| rwlock.c part 9 writelock 
Now that we have all the pieces, rwlock_main.c shows a program that uses 
read/write locks. 
n-17 Each thread is described by a structure of type thread_t. The thread_num 
member is the thread's index within the array of thread_t structures. The 
thread_id member is the pthread_t (thread identifier) returned by pthread_ 
create when the thread was created. The updates and reads members are 
counts of the number of read lock and write lock operations performed by the 
thread. The interval member is generated randomly as each thread is created, 
to determine how many iterations the thread will read before it performs a write. 
22-26 The threads cycle through an array of data_t elements. Each element has a 
read/write lock, a data element, and a count of how many times some thread has 
updated the element. 
48-58 The program creates a set of threads running the thread_routine function. 
Each thread loops iterations times, practicing use of the read/write lock. It 
cycles through the array of data elements in sequence, resetting the index (ele- 
ment) to 0 when it reaches the end. At intervals specified by each thread's 
interval member, the thread will modify the current data element instead of 
reading it. The thread locks the read/write lock for write access, stores its 
thread_num as the new data value, and increases the updates counter. 
59-73 On all other iterations, thread_routine reads the current data element, lock- 
ing the read/write lock for read access. It compares the data value against its 
thread_num to determine whether it was the most recent thread to update that 
data element, and, if so, it increments a counter. 
95-103 On Solaris systems, increase the thread concurrency level to generate more 
interesting activity. Without timesllcing of user threads, each thread would tend 
to execute sequentially otherwise. 
| rwlock_main.c 
1 #include "rwlock.h" 
2 #include "errors.h" 
3 
4 #define THREADS 5 
5 #define DATASIZE 15 
6 #define ITERATIONS 10000 
7 
8 /* 
9 * Keep statistics for each thread. 
10 */ 
11 typedef struct thread_tag { 
12 int thread num; 
Extended synchronization 267 
13 pthread_t thread_id; 
14 int updates; 
15 int reads; 
16 int interval; 
17 } thread_t; 
18 
19 /* 
20 * Read/write lock and shared data. 
21 */ 
22 typedef struct data_tag { 
23 rwlock_t lock; 
24 int data; 
25 int updates; 
26 } data_t; 
27 
28 thread_t threads[THREADS]; 
29 data_t data[DATASIZE]; 
30 
31 /* 
32 * Thread start routine that uses read/write locks. 
33 */ 
34 void *thread_routine (void *arg) 
35 { 
36 thread_t *self = (thread_t*)arg; 
37 int repeats = 0; 
38 int iteration; 
39 int element =0; 
40 int status; 
41 
42 for (iteration = 0; iteration < ITERATIONS; iteration++) { 
43 /* 
44 * Each "self->interval" iterations, perform an 
45 * update operation (write lock instead of read 
46 * lock). 
47 */ 
48 if ((iteration % self->interval) == 0) { 
49 status = rwl_writelock (&data[element].lock); 
50 if (status != 0) 
51 err_abort (status, "Write lock"); 
52 data[element].data = self->thread_num; 
53 data[element].updates++; 
54 self->updates++; 
55 status = rwl_writeunlock (&data[element].lock); 
56 if (status != 0) 
57 err_abort (status, "Write unlock"); 
58 } else { 
59 /* 
60 * Look at the current data element to see whether 
61 * the current thread last updated it. Count the 
268 CHAPTER 7 "Real code" 
62 * times, to report later. 
63 */ 
64 status = rwl_readlock (&data[element].lock); 
65 if (status != 0) 
66 err_abort (status, "Read lock"); 
67 self->reads++; 
68 if (data[element].data == self->thread_num) 
69 repeats++; 
70 status = rwl_readunlock (&data[element].lock); 
71 if (status != 0) 
72 err_abort (status, "Read unlock"); 
73 } 
74 element++; 
75 if (element >= DATASIZE) 
76 element = 0; 
77 } 
78 
79 if (repeats > 0) 
80 printf ( 
81 "Thread %d found unchanged elements %d times\n", 
82 self->thread_num, repeats); 
83 return NULL; 
84 } 
85 
86 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
87 { 
88 int count; 
89 int data_count; 
90 int status; 
91 unsigned int seed = 1; 
92 int thread_updates = 0; 
93 int data_updates =0; 
94 
95 #ifdef sun 
96 /* 
97 * On Solaris 2.5, threads are not timesliced. To ensure 
98 * that our threads can run concurrently, we need to 
99 * increase the concurrency level to THREADS. 
100 */ 
101 DPRINTF (("Setting concurrency level to %d\n", THREADS)); 
102 thr_setconcurrency (THREADS); 
103 #endif 
104 
105 /* 
106 * Initialize the shared data. 
107 */ 
108 for (data_count = 0; data_count < DATASIZE; data_count++) { 
109 data[data_count].data = 0; 
110 data[data_count].updates = 0; 
Extended synchronization 269 
111 status = rwl_init (&data[data_count].lock); 
112 if (status != 0) 
113 err_abort (status, "Init rw lock"); 
114 } 
115 
116 /* 
117 * Create THREADS threads to access shared data. 
118 */ 
119 for (count = 0; count < THREADS; count++) { 
120 threads[count].thread_num = count; 
121 threads[count].updates = 0; 
122 threads[count].reads = 0; 
123 threads[count].interval = rand_r (Sseed) % 71; 
124 status = pthread_create (&threads[count].thread_id, 
125 NULL, thread_routine, (void*)&threads[count]); 
126 if (status != 0) 
127 err_abort (status, "Create thread"); 
128 } 
129 
130 /* 
131 * Wait for all threads to complete, and collect 
132 * statistics. 
133 */ 
134 for (count = 0; count < THREADS; count++) { 
135 status = pthread_join (threads[count].thread_id, NULL); 
136 if (status != 0) 
137 err_abort (status, "Join thread"); 
138 thread_updates += threads[count].updates; 
139 printf ("%02d: interval %d, updates %d, reads %d\n", 
140 count, threads[count].interval, 
141 threads[count].updates, threads[count].reads); 
142 } 
143 
144 /* 
145 * Collect statistics for the data. 
146 */ 
147 for (data_count = 0; data_count < DATASIZE; data_count++) { 
148 data_updates += data[data_count].updates; 
149 printf ("data %02d: value %d, %d updates\n", 
150 data_count, data[data_count].data, 
151 data[data_count].updates); 
152 rwl_destroy (&data[data_count].lock); 
153 } 
154 
155 printf ("%d thread updates, %d data updates\n", 
156 thread_updates, data_updates); 
157 return 0; 
158 } 
| rwlock main.c 
270 CHAPTER 7 "Real code" 
7.2 Work queue manager 
I've already briefly outlined the various models of thread cooperation. These 
include pipelines, work crews, client/servers, and so forth. In this section, I 
present the development of a "work queue," a set of threads that accepts work 
requests from a common queue, processing them (potentially) in parallel. 
The work queue manager could also be considered a work crew manager, 
depending on your reference point. If you think of it as a way to feed work to a set 
of threads, then "work crew" might be more appropriate. I prefer to think of it as a 
queue that magically does work for you in the background, since the presence of 
the work crew is almost completely invisible to the caller. 
When you create the work queue, you can specify the maximum level of paral- 
lelism that you need. The work queue manager interprets that as the maximum 
number of "engine" threads that it may create to process your requests. Threads 
will be started and stopped as required by the amount of work. A thread that 
finds nothing to do will wait a short time and then terminate. The optimal "short 
time" depends on how expensive it is to create a new thread on your system, the 
cost in system resources to keep a thread going that's not doing anything, and 
how likely it is that you'll need the thread again soon. I've chosen two seconds, 
which is probably much too long. 
The header file workq. h and the C source file workq. c demonstrate an imple- 
mentation of a work queue manager. Part 1 shows the two structure types used 
by the work queue package. The workq_t type is the external representation of a 
work queue, and the workqelet is an internal representation of work items 
that have been queued. 
6-9 The workq_ele_t structure is used to maintain a linked list of work items. It 
has a link element (called next) and a data value, which is stored when the work 
item is queued and passed to the caller's "engine function" with no interpretation. 
14-16 Of course, there's a mutex to serialize access to the workqt, and a condition 
variable (cv) on which the engine threads wait for work to be queued. 
17 The attr member is a thread attributes object, used when creating new 
engine threads. The attributes object could instead have been a static variable 
within workq.c, but I chose to add a little memory overhead to each work queue, 
rather than add the minor complexity of one-time initialization of a static data 
item. 
18 The first member points to the first item on the work queue. As an optimiza- 
tion to make it easier to queue new items at the end of the queue, the last 
member points to the last item on the queue. 
19-24 These members record assorted information about the work queue. The valid 
member is a magic number that's set when the work queue is initialized, as we've 
seen before in barriers and read/write locks. (In this case, the magic number is 
the month and year of my daughter's birthday.) The quit member is a flag that 
allows the "work queue manager" to tell engine threads to terminate as soon as 
the queue is empty. The parallelism member records how many threads the 
creator chose to allow the work queue to utilize, counter records the number of 
Work queue manager 
27'1 
threads created, and idle records the current number of threads that are waiting 
for work. The engine member is the user's "engine function," supplied when the 
work queue was created. As you can see, the engine function takes an "untyped" 
(void *) argument, and has no return value. 
workq.h 
part 1 workq_t 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
|include <pthread.h> 
/* 
* Structure to keep track of work queue requests. 
*/ 
typedef struct workq_ele_tag { 
struct workq_ele_tag *next; 
void *data; 
} workq_ele_t; 
/* 
* Structure describing a work queue. 
*/ 
typedef struct workq_tag { 
pthread_mutex_t 
pthread_cond_t 
pthread_attr_t 
workq_ele_t 
int 
int 
int 
int 
int 
void 
} workq_t; 
tdefine WORKQ VALID 
last; 
mutex; 
cv; 
attr; 
*first, 
valid; 
quit; 
parallelism; 
counter; 
idle; 
/* control access to queue */ 
/* wait for work */ 
/* create detached threads */ 
/* work queue */ 
/* valid */ 
/* workq should quit */ 
/* maximum threads */ 
/* current threads */ 
/* number of idle threads */ 
(*engine)(void *arg); /* user engine */ 
0xdecl992 
workq.h 
part 1 workq_t 
Part 2 shows the interfaces we'll create for our work queue. We need to create 
and destroy work queue managers, so we'll define workq_init and workq_destroy. 
Both take a pointer to a workq_t structure. In addition, the initializer needs the 
maximum number of threads the manager is allowed to create to service the queue, 
and the engine function. Finally, the program needs to be able to queue work items 
for processing！we'll call the interface for this workqadd. It takes a pointer to the 
workq_t and the argument that should be passed to the engine function. 
272 CHAPTER 7 "Real code' 
| workq.h part 2 interfaces 
1 /* 
2 * Define work queue functions. 
3 */ 
4 extern int workq_init ( 
5 workq_t *wq, 
6 int threads, /* maximum threads */ 
7 void (*engine)(void *)); /* engine routine */ 
8 extern int workq_destroy (workq t *wq); 
9 extern int workq_add (workq_t *wq, void *data); 
| workq.h part 2 interfaces 
The file workq.c contains the implementation of our work queue. The follow- 
ing examples break down each of the functions used to implement the workq. h 
interfaces. 
Part 1 shows the workq_init function, which initializes a work queue. We 
create the Pthreads synchronization objects that we need, and fill in the remain- 
ing members. 
14-22 Initialize the thread attributes object attr so that the engine threads we 
create will run detached. That means we do not need to keep track of their thread 
identifier values, or worry about joining with them. 
34-40 We're not ready to quit yet (we've hardly started!), so clear the quit flag. The 
parallelism member records the maximum number of threads we are allowed to 
create, which is the workq_init parameter threads. The counter member will 
record the current number of active engine threads, initially 0, and idle will record 
the number of active threads waiting for more work. And of course, finally, we set 
the valid member. 
| workq.c part 1 workq_init 
1 #include <pthread.h> 
2 #include <stdlib.h> 
3 #include <time.h> 
4 #include "errors.h" 
5 #include "workq.h" 
6 
7 /* 
8 * Initialize a work queue. 
9 */ 
10 int workq_init (workq_t *wq, int threads, void (*engine)(void *arg)) 
11 { 
12 int status; 
13 
14 status = pthread_attr_init (&wq->attr); 
15 if (status != 0) 
16 return status; 
17 status = pthread attr setdetachstate ( 
Work queue manager 273 
18 &wq->attr, PTHREAD_CREATE_DETACHED); 
19 if (status != 0) { 
20 pthread_attr_destroy (&wq->attr); 
21 return status; 
22 } 
23 status = pthread_mutex_init (&wq->mutex, NULL); 
24 if (status != 0) { 
25 pthread_attr_destroy (&wq->attr); 
26 return status; 
27 } 
2 8 status = pthread_cond_init (&wq->cv, NULL); 
29 if (status != 0) { 
30 pthread_mutex_destroy (&wq->mutex); 
31 pthread_attr_destroy (&wq->attr); 
32 return status; 
33 } 
34 wq->quit =0; /* not time to quit */ 
35 wq->first = wq->last = NULL; /* no queue entries */ 
36 wq->parallelism = threads; /* max servers */ 
37 wq->counter =0; /* no server threads yet */ 
38 wq->idle = 0; /* no idle servers */ 
39 wq->engine = engine; 
40 wq->valid = WORKQ_VALID; 
41 return 0; 
42 } 
| workq.c part 1 workq_init 
Part 2 shows the workq_destroy function. The procedure for shutting down a 
work queue is a little different than the others we've seen. Remember that the 
Pthreads mutex and condition variable destroy function fail, returning ebusy, 
when you try to destroy an object that is in use. We used the same model for 
barriers and read/write locks. But we cannot do the same for work queues！the 
calling program cannot know whether the work queue is in use, because the caller 
only queues requests that are processed asynchronously. 
The work queue manager will accept a request to shut down at any time, but it 
will wait for all existing engine threads to complete their work and terminate. 
Only when the last work queue element has been processed and the last engine 
thread has exited will workq_destroy return successfully. 
2 4 If the work queue has no threads, either it was never used or all threads have 
timed out and shut down since it was last used. That makes things easy, and we 
can skip all the shutdown complication. 
25-33 If there are engine threads, they are asked to shut down by setting the quit 
flag in the workq_t structure and broadcasting the condition variable to awaken 
any waiting (idle) engine threads. Each engine thread will eventually run and see 
this flag. When they see it and find no more work, they'll shut themselves down. 
44-50 The last thread to shut down will wake up the thread that's waiting in workq_ 
destroy, and the shutdown will complete. Instead of creating a condition variable 
274 CHAPTER 7 "Real code" 
that's used only to wake up workq_destroy, the last thread will signal the same 
condition variable used to inform idle engine threads of new work. At this point, 
all waiters have already been awakened by a broadcast, and they won't wait again 
because the quit flag is set. Shutdown occurs only once during the life of the 
work queue manager, so there's little point to creating a separate condition variable 
for this purpose. 
| workq.c part 2 workq_destroy 
1 /* 
2 * Destroy a work queue. 
3 */ 
4 int workq_destroy (workq_t *wq) 
5 { 
6 int status, statusl, status2; 
7 
8 if (wq->valid != WORKQ_VALID) 
9 return EINVAL; 
10 status = pthread_mutex_lock (&wq->mutex); 
11 if (status != 0) 
12 return status; 
13 wq->valid =0; /* prevent any other operations */ 
14 
15 /* 
16 * Check whether any threads are active, and run them down: 
17 * 
18 * 1. set the quit flag 
19 * 2. broadcast to wake any servers that may be asleep 
20 * 4. wait for all threads to quit (counter goes to 0) 
21 * Because we don't use join, we don't need to worry 
22 * about tracking thread IDs. 
23 */ 
24 if (wq->counter > 0) { 
25 wq->quit = 1; 
26 /* if any threads are idling, wake them. */ 
27 if (wq->idle > 0) { 
28 status = pthread_cond_broadcast (&wq->cv); 
29 if (status != 0) { 
30 pthread_mutex_unlock (&wq->mutex); 
31 return status; 
32 } 
33 } 
34 
35 /* 
36 * Just to prove that every rule has an exception, I'm 
37 * using the "cv" condition for two separate predicates 
38 * here. That's OK, since the case used here applies 
39 * only once during the life of a work queue ！ during 
40 * rundown. The overhead is minimal and it's not worth 
41 * creating a separate condition variable that would 
Work queue manager 275 
42 * wait and be signaled exactly once! 
43 */ 
44 while (wq->counter > 0) { 
45 status = pthread_cond_wait (&wq->cv, &wq->mutex); 
46 if (status != 0) { 
47 pthread_mutex_unlock (&wq->mutex); 
48 return status; 
49 } 
50 } 
51 } 
52 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (&wq->mutex); 
53 if (status != 0) 
54 return status; 
55 status = pthread_mutex_destroy (&wq->mutex); 
56 statusl = pthread_cond_destroy (&wq->cv); 
57 status2 = pthread_attr_destroy (&wq->attr); 
58 return (status ? status : (statusl ? statusl : status2)); 
59 } 
| workq.c part 2 workq_destroy 
Part 3 shows workq_add, which accepts work for the queue manager system. 
16-35 It allocates a new work queue element and initializes It from the parameters. It 
queues the element, updating the first and last pointers as necessary. 
40-45 If there are idle engine threads, which were created but ran out of work, signal 
the condition variable to wake one. 
46-59 If there are no idle engine threads, and the value of parallelism allows for 
more, create a new engine thread. If there are no idle threads and it can't create a 
new engine thread, workq_add returns, leaving the new element for the next 
thread that finishes its current assignment. 
| workq.c part 3 workq_add 
1 /* 
2 * Add an item to a work queue. 
3 */ 
4 int workq_add (workq_t *wq, void *element) 
5 { 
6 workq_ele_t *item; 
7 pthread_t id; 
8 int status; 
9 
10 if (wq->valid != WORKQ_VALID) 
11 return EINVAL; 
12 
13 /* 
14 * Create and initialize a request structure. 
15 */ 
16 item = (workq_ele_t *)malloc (sizeof (workq_ele_t)); 
276 CHAPTER 7 "Real code" 
17 if (item == NULL) 
18 return ENOMEM; 
19 item->data = element; 
20 item->next = NULL; 
21 status = pthread_mutex_lock (&wq->mutex); 
22 if (status != 0) { 
23 free (item); 
24 return status; 
25 } 
26 
27 /* 
28 * Add the request to the end of the queue, updating the 
29 * first and last pointers. 
30 */ 
31 if (wq->first == NULL) 
32 wq->first = item; 
33 else 
34 wq->last->next = item; 
35 wq->last = item; 
36 
37 /* 
38 * if any threads are idling, wake one. 
39 */ 
40 if (wq->idle > 0) { 
41 status = pthread_cond_signal (&wq->cv); 
42 if (status != 0) { 
43 pthread_mutex_unlock (&wq->mutex); 
44 return status; 
45 } 
46 } else if (wq->counter < wq->parallelism) { 
47 /* 
48 * If there were no idling threads, and we're allowed to 
49 * create a new thread, do so. 
50 */ 
51 DPRINTF (("Creating new worker\n")); 
52 status = pthread_create ( 
53 &id, &wq->attr, workq_server, (void*)wq); 
54 if (status != 0) { 
55 pthread_mutex_unlock (&wq->mutex); 
56 return status; 
57 } 
58 wq->counter++; 
59 } 
60 pthread_mutex_unlock (&wq->mutex); 
61 return 0; 
62 } 
| workq.c part 3 workq_add 
Work queue manager 277 
That takes care of all the external interfaces, but we will need one more func- 
tion, the start function for the engine threads. The function, shown in part 4, is 
called workq_server. Although we could start a thread running the caller's 
engine with the appropriate argument for each request, this is more efficient. The 
workq_server function will dequeue the next request and pass it to the engine 
function, then look for new work. It will wait if necessary and shut down only 
when a certain period of time passes without any new work appearing, or when 
told to shut down by workq_destroy. 
Notice that the server begins by locking the work queue mutex, and the 
"matching" unlock does not occur until the engine thread is ready to terminate. 
Despite this, the thread spends most of its life with the mutex unlocked, either 
waiting for work in the condition variable wait or within the caller's engine 
function. 
29-62 When a thread completes the condition wait loop, either there is work to be 
done or the work queue is shutting down (wq->quit is nonzero). 
67-80 First, we check for work and process the work queue element if there is one. 
There could still be work queued when workq_destroy is called, and it must all 
be processed before any engine thread terminates. 
The user's engine function is called with the mutex unlocked, so that the 
user's engine can run a long time, or block, without affecting the execution of 
other engine threads. That does not necessarily mean that engine functions can 
run in parallel！the caller-supplied engine function is responsible for ensuring 
whatever synchronization is needed to allow the desired level of concurrency or 
parallelism. Ideal engine functions would require little or no synchronization and 
would run in parallel. 
86-104 When there is no more work and the queue is being shut down, the thread ter- 
minates, awakening workq_destroy if this was the last engine thread to shut 
down. 
no-114 Finally we check whether the engine thread timed out looking for work, which 
would mean the engine has waited long enough. If there's still no work to be 
found, the engine thread exits. 
| workq.c part 4 workq_server 
1 /* 
2 * Thread start routine to serve the work queue. 
3 */ 
4 static void *workq_server (void *arg) 
5 { 
6 struct timespec timeout; 
7 workq_t *wq = (workq_t *)arg; 
8 workq_ele_t *we; 
9 int status, timedout; 
10 
11 /* 
12 * We don't need to validate the workq_t here... we don't 
278 CHAPTER 7 "Real code" 
13 * create server threads until requests are queued (the 
14 * queue has been initialized by then!) and we wait for all 
15 * server threads to terminate before destroying a work 
16 * queue. 
17 */ 
18 DPRINTF (("A worker is starting\n")); 
19 status = pthread_mutex_lock (&wq->mutex); 
20 if (status != 0) 
21 return NULL; 
22 
23 while A) { 
24 timedout = 0; 
25 DPRINTF (("Worker waiting for work\n")); 
26 clock_gettime (CLOCK_REALTIME, Stimeout); 
27 timeout.tv_sec += 2; 
28 
29 while (wq->first == NULL && !wq->quit) { 
30 /* 
31 * Server threads time out after spending 2 seconds 
32 * waiting for new work, and exit. 
33 */ 
34 status = pthread_cond_timedwait ( 
35 &wq->cv, &wq->mutex, Stimeout); 
36 if (status == ETIMEDOUT) { 
37 DPRINTF (("Worker wait timed out\n")); 
38 timedout = 1; 
39 break; 
40 } else if (status != 0) { 
41 /* 
42 * This shouldn't happen, so the work queue 
43 * package should fail. Because the work queue 
44 * API is asynchronous, that would add 
45 * complication. Because the chances of failure 
46 * are slim, I choose to avoid that 
47 * complication. The server thread will return, 
48 * and allow another server thread to pick up 
49 * the work later. Note that if this were the 
50 * only server thread, the queue wouldn't be 
51 * serviced until a new work item is 
52 * queued. That could be fixed by creating a new 
53 * server here. 
54 */ 
55 DPRINTF (( 
56 "Worker wait failed, %d (%s)\n", 
57 status, strerror (status))); 
58 wq->counter！; 
59 pthread_mutex_unlock (&wq->mutex); 
60 return NULL; 
61 } 
62 } 
Work queue manager 279 
63 DPRINTF (("Work queue: %#lx, quit: %d\n", 
64 wq->first, wq->quit)); 
65 we = wq->first; 
66 
67 if (we != NULL) { 
68 wq->first = we->next; 
69 if (wq->last == we) 
70 wq->last = NULL; 
71 status = pthread_mutex_unlock (&wq->mutex); 
72 if (status != 0) 
73 return NULL; 
74 DPRINTF (("Worker calling engine\n")); 
75 wq->engine (we->data); 
76 free (we); 
77 status = pthread_mutex_lock (&wq->mutex); 
78 if (status != 0) 
79 return NULL; 
80 } 
81 
82 /* 
83 * If there are no more work requests, and the servers 
84 * have been asked to quit, then shut down. 
85 */ 
86 if (wq->first == NULL && wq->quit) { 
87 DPRINTF (("Worker shutting down\n")); 
88 wq->counter！; 
89 
90 /* 
91 * NOTE: Just to prove that every rule has an 
92 * exception, I'm using the "cv" condition for two 
93 * separate predicates here. That's OK, since the 
94 * case used here applies only once during the life 
95 * of a work queue -- during rundown. The overhead 
96 * is minimal and it's not worth creating a separate 
97 * condition variable that would wait and be 
98 * signaled exactly once! 
99 */ 
100 if (wq->counter == 0) 
101 pthread_cond_broadcast (&wq->cv); 
102 pthread_mutex_unlock (&wq->mutex); 
103 return NULL; 
104 } 
105 
106 /* 
107 * If there's no more work, and we wait for as long as 
108 * we're allowed, then terminate this server thread. 
109 */ 
110 if (wq->first == NULL && timedout) { 
111 DPRINTF (("engine terminating due to timeout.\n")); 
280 
CHAPTER 7 "Real code" 
112 
113 
114 
115 
116 
117 
118 
119 
120 
wq->counter！; 
break; 
pthread_mutex_unlock (&wq->inutex); 
DPRINTF (("Worker exiting\n")); 
return NULL; 
15-19 
29-37 
43-68 
73-98 
workq.c 
part 4 workq_server 
Finally, workq_main. c is a sample program that uses our work queue man- 
ager. Two threads queue work elements to the work queue in parallel. The engine 
function is designed to gather some statistics about engine usage. To accomplish 
this, it uses thread-specific data. When the sample run completes, main collects 
all of the thread-specific data and reports some statistics. 
Each engine thread has an engine_t structure associated with the thread- 
specific data key engine_key. The engine function gets the calling thread's value 
of this key, and if the current value is NULL, creates a new engine_t structure 
and assigns it to the key. The calls member of engine_t structure records the 
number of calls to the engine function within each thread. 
The thread-specific data key's destructor function, destructor, adds the ter- 
minating thread's engine_t to a list (engine_list_head), where main can find it 
later to generate the final report. 
The engine function's work is relatively boring. The argument is a pointer to a 
power_t structure, containing the members value and power. It uses a trivial 
loop to multiply value by itself power times. The result is discarded in this exam- 
ple, and the power_t structure is freed. 
A thread is started, by main, running the thread_routine function. In addi- 
tion, main calls thread_routine. The thread_routine function loops for some 
number of iterations, determined by the macro iterations, creating and queu- 
ing work queue elements. The value and power members of the power_t 
structure are determined semirandomly using rand_r. The function sleeps for a 
random period of time, from zero to four seconds, to occasionally allow engine 
threads to time out and terminate. Typically when you run this program you 
would expect to see summary messages reporting some small number of engine 
threads, each of which processed some number of calls！which total 50 calls B5 
each from the two threads). 
workq_main.c 
1 #include <pthread.h> 
2 #include <stdlib.h> 
3 #include <stdio.h> 
4 #include <time.h> 
5 #include "workq.h" 
Work queue manager 281 
6 #include "errors.h" 
7 
8 #define ITERATIONS 25 
9 
10 typedef struct power_tag { 
11 int value; 
12 int power; 
13 } power_t; 
14 
15 typedef struct engine_tag { 
16 struct engine_tag *link; 
17 pthread_t thread_id; 
18 int calls; 
19 } engine_t; 
20 
21 pthread_key_t engine_key; /* Keep track of active engines */ 
22 pthread_mutex_t engine_list_mutex = PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER; 
23 engine_t *engine_list_head = NULL; 
24 workq_t workg; 
25 
26 /* 
27 * Thread-specific data destructor routine for engine_key. 
28 */ 
29 void destructor (void *value_ptr) 
30 { 
31 engine_t *engine = (engine_t*)value_ptr; 
32 
33 pthread_mutex_lock (&engine_list_mutex); 
34 engine->link = engine_list_head; 
35 engine_list_head = engine; 
36 pthread_rautex_unlock (&engine_list_mutex); 
37 } 
38 
39 /* 
40 * This is the routine called by the work queue servers to 
41 * perform operations in parallel. 
42 */ 
43 void engine_routine (void *arg) 
44 { 
45 engine_t *engine; 
46 power_t *power = (power_t*)arg; 
47 int result, count; 
48 int status; 
49 
50 engine = pthread_getspecific (engine_key); 
51 if (engine == NULL) { 
52 engine = (engine_t*)malloc (sizeof (engine_t)); 
53 status = pthread_setspecific ( 
54 engine key, (void*)engine); 
282 CHAPTER 7 "Real code" 
55 if (status != 0) 
56 err_abort (status, "Set tsd"); 
57 engine->thread_id = pthread_self (); 
58 engine->calls = 1; 
59 } else 
60 engine->calls++; 
61 result = 1; 
62 printf ( 
63 "Engine: computing %d'%d\n", 
64 power->value, power->power); 
65 for (count = 1; count <= power->power; count++) 
66 result *= power->value; 
67 free (arg); 
68 } 
69 
70 /* 
71 * Thread start routine that issues work queue requests. 
72 */ 
73 void *thread_routine (void *arg) 
74 { 
75 power_t *element; 
76 int count; 
77 unsigned int seed = (unsigned int)time (NULL); 
78 int status; 
79 
80 /* 
81 * Loop, making requests. 
82 */ 
83 for (count = 0; count < ITERATIONS; count++) { 
84 element = (power_t*)malloc (sizeof (power_t)); 
85 if (element == NULL) 
86 errno_abort ("Allocate element"); 
87 element->value = rand_r (Sseed) % 20; 
88 element->power = rand_r (Sseed) % 7; 
89 DPRINTF (( 
90 "Request: %d~%d\n", 
91 element->value, element->power)); 
92 status = workq_add (Sworkq, (void*)element); 
93 if (status != 0) 
94 err_abort (status, "Add to work queue"); 
95 sleep (rand_r (Sseed) % 5); 
96 } 
97 return NULL; 
98 } 
99 
100 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
101 { 
102 pthread_t thread_id; 
103 engine_t *engine; 
But what about existing libraries? 283 
104 int count = 0, calls = 0; 
105 int status; 
106 
107 status = pthread_key_create (&engine_key, destructor); 
108 if (status != 0) 
109 err_abort (status, "Create key"); 
110 status = workq_init (sworkq, 4, engine_routine); 
111 if (status != 0) 
112 err_abort (status, "Init work queue"); 
113 status = pthread_create (&thread_id, NULL, thread_routine, NULL); 
114 if (status != 0) 
115 err_abort (status, "Create thread"); 
116 (void)thread_routine (NULL); 
117 status = pthread_join (thread_id, NULL); 
118 if (status != 0) 
119 err_abort (status, "Join thread"); 
120 status = workq_destroy (Sworkq); 
121 if (status != 0) 
122 err_abort (status, "Destroy work queue"); 
123 
124 /* 
125 * By now, all of the engine_t structures have been placed 
126 * on the list (by the engine thread destructors), so we 
127 * can count and summarize them. 
128 */ 
129 engine = engine_list_head; 
130 while (engine != NULL) { 
131 count++; 
132 calls += engine->calls; 
133 printf ("engine %d: %d calls\n", count, engine->calls); 
134 engine = engine->link; 
135 } 
136 printf ("%d engine threads processed %d calls\n", 
137 count, calls); 
138 return 0; 
139 } 
| workq_main.c 
7.3 But what about existing libraries? 
"The great art of riding, as I was saying is！ 
to keep your balance properly. Like this, you know！" 
He let go the bridle, and stretched out both his arms to 
show Alice what he meant, and this time he fell flat on 
his back, right under the horse's feet. 
！Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking-Glass 
284 CHAPTER 7 "Real code" 
When you create a new library, all it takes is careful design to ensure that the 
library will be thread-safe. As you decide what state is needed for the function, 
you can determine which state needs to be shared between threads, which state 
should be managed by the caller through external context handles, which state can 
be kept in local variables within a function, and so forth. You can define the inter- 
faces to the functions to support that state in the most efficient manner. But when 
you're modifying an existing library to work with threads, you usually don't have 
that luxury. And when you are using someone else's library, you may need simply 
to "make do." 
7.3.1 Modifying libraries to be thread-safe 
Many functions rely on static storage across a sequence of calls, for example, 
strtok or getpwd. Others depend on returning a pointer to static storage, for 
example, asctime. This section points out some techniques that can help when 
you need to make "legacy" libraries thread-safe, using some well-known exam- 
ples in the ANSI C run-time library. 
The simplest technique is to assign a mutex to each subsystem. At any call 
into the subsystem you lock the mutex; at any exit from the subsystem you 
unlock the mutex. Because this single mutex covers the entire subsystem, we 
often refer to such a mechanism as a "big mutex" (see Section 3.2.4). The mutex 
prevents more than one thread from executing within the subsystem at a time. 
Note that this fixes only synchronization races, not sequence races (Section 8.1.2 
describes the distinction between the two). The best candidates for this approach 
are functions that do little except maintain some internal database. That includes 
functions such as malloc and free that manage an internal resource pool but 
grant limited (or no) external visibility into that pool. 
One problem with using the "big mutex" approach is that you have to be care- 
ful about your definition of "subsystem." You need to include all functions that 
share data or that call each other. If malloc and free have one mutex while real- 
loc uses another, then you've got a race as soon as one thread calls realloc 
while another thread is in malloc or free. 
And what if realloc is implemented to call malloc, copy data, and then call 
free on the old pointer? The realloc function would lock the heap mutex and 
call malloc. The malloc function would immediately try to lock the heap mutex 
itself, resulting in a deadlock. There are several ways to solve this. One is to care- 
fully separate each of the external interfaces into an internal "engine" function 
that does the actual work and an external entry point that locks the subsystem 
mutex and calls the engine. Other entry points within the subsystem that need 
the same engine function would call it directly rather than using the normal entry 
point. That's often the most efficient solution, but it is also harder to do. Another 
possibility is to construct a "recursive" mutex that allows the subsystem to relock 
But what about existing libraries? 285 
its own mutex without deadlock.* Now malloc and free are allowed to relock the 
mutex held by realloc, but another thread trying to call any of them will be 
blocked until realloc completely unlocks the recursive mutex. 
Most functions with persistent state require more substantial changes than 
just a "big mutex," especially to avoid altering the interface. The asctime func- 
tion, for example, returns a pointer to the character string representation of a 
binary time. Traditionally, the string is formatted into a static buffer declared 
within the asctime function, and the function returns a pointer to that buffer. 
Locking a mutex within asctime isn't enough to protect the data. In fact, it is 
not even particularly useful. After asctime returns, the mutex has been 
unlocked. The caller needs to read the buffer, and there is nothing to prevent 
another thread from calling asctime (and "corrupting" the first thread's result) 
before the first thread has finished reading or copying it. To solve this problem 
using a mutex, the caller would need to lock a mutex before calling asctime, and 
then unlock it only after it had finished with the data or copied the returned 
buffer somewhere "safe." 
The problem can instead be fixed by recoding asctime to allocate a heap 
buffer using malloc, formatting the time string into that buffer, and returning its 
address. The function can use a thread-specific data key to keep track of the 
heap address so that it can be reused on the next call within that thread. When 
the thread terminates, a destructor function can free the storage. 
It would be more efficient to avoid using malloc and thread-specific data, but 
that requires changing the interface to asctime. Pthreads adds a new thread-safe 
alternative to asctime, called asctime_r, which requires the caller to pass the 
address and length of a buffer. The asctime_r function formats the time string 
into the caller's buffer. This allows the caller to manage the buffer in any way 
that's convenient. It can be on the thread's stack, in heap, or can even be shared 
between threads. Although in a way this is "giving up" on the existing function 
and defining a new function, it is often the best way (and sometimes the only 
practical way) to make a function thread-safe. 
7.3.2 Living with legacy libraries 
Sometimes you have to work with code you didn't write, and can't change. A 
lot of code is now being made thread-safe, and most operating systems that sup- 
port threads can be expected to supply thread-safe implementations of the 
* It is easy to construct a "recursive" mutex using a mutex, a condition variable, the pthread_ 
t value of the current owner (if any), and a count of the owner's "recursion depth." The depth is 
0 when the recursive mutex is not locked, and greater than 0 when it is locked. The mutex pro- 
tects access to the depth and owner members, and the condition variable is used to wait for the 
depth to become 0, should a thread wish to lock the recursive mutex while another thread has it 
locked. 
286 CHAPTER 7 "Real code" 
common bundled library packages. The "inner circle" of thread-safe libraries will 
gradually increase to become the rule rather than the exception as more applica- 
tion and library developers demand thread-safety. 
But inevitably you'll find that a library you need hasn't been made thread- 
safe, for example, an older version of the X Windows windowing system, or a 
database engine, or a simulation package. And you won't have source code. Of 
course you'll immediately complain to the supplier of the library and convince 
them to make the next version fully thread-safe. But what can you do until the 
new version arrives? 
If you really need the library, the answer is "use it anyway." There are a num- 
ber of techniques you can use, from simple to complex. The appropriate level of 
complexity required depends entirely on the library's interface and how (as well 
as how much) you use the library in your code. 
I Make the unsafe library into a server thread. 
In some cases, you may find it convenient to restrict use of the library to one 
thread, making that thread a "server" for the capabilities provided by the unsafe 
library. This technique is commonly applied, for example, when using versions 
of the XI1 protocol client library that are not thread-safe. The main thread or 
some other thread created for the purpose processes queued XI1 requests on 
behalf of other threads. Only the server thread makes calls into the XI1 library, 
so it does not matter whether XI1 is thread-safe. 
I Write your own "big mutex" wrappers around the interfaces. 
If the function you need has a "thread-safe interface" but not a "thread-safe 
implementation," then you may be able to encapsulate each call inside a wrapper 
function (or a macro) that locks a mutex, calls the function, and then unlocks the 
mutex. This is just an external version of the "big mutex" approach. By "thread- 
safe interface" I mean that the function relies on the static state, but that any 
data returned to the caller isn't subject to alteration by later calls. For example, 
malloc fits that category. The allocation of memory involves static data that 
needs to be protected, but once a block has been allocated and returned to a 
caller, that address (and the memory to which it points) will not be affected by 
later calls to malloc. The external "big mutex" is not a good solution for libraries 
that may block for substantial periods of time！like XI1 or any other network 
protocol. While the result may be safe, it will be very inefficient unless you rarely 
use the library, because other threads may be locked out for long periods of time 
while remote operations are taking place. 
I Extend the implementation with external state. 
A big mutex won't fix a function like asctime that writes data into a static 
buffer and returns the address: The returned data must be protected until the 
But what about existing libraries? 287 
caller is finished using it, and the data is used outside the wrapper. For a func- 
tion like strtok the data is in use until the entire sequence of tokens has been 
parsed. In general, functions that have persistent static data are more difficult to 
encapsulate. 
A function like asctime can be encapsulated by creating a wrapper function 
that locks a mutex, calls the function, copies the return value into a thread-safe 
buffer, unlocks the mutex, and then returns. The thread-safe buffer can be 
dynamically allocated by the wrapper function using malloc, for instance. You 
can require the caller to free the buffer when done, which changes the interface, 
or you can make the wrapper keep track of a per-thread buffer using thread- 
specific data. 
Alternatively, you could invent a new interface that requires the caller to sup- 
ply a buffer. The caller can use a stack buffer, or a buffer in heap, or, if properly 
synchronized (by the caller), it can share the buffer between threads. Remember 
that if the wrapper uses thread-specific data to keep track of a per-thread heap 
buffer, the wrapper can be made compatible with the original interface. The other 
variants require interface changes: The caller must supply different inputs or it 
must be aware of the need to free the returned buffer. 
A function that keeps persistent state across a sequence of calls is more diffi- 
cult to encapsulate neatly. The static data must be protected throughout. The 
easiest way to do this is simply to change the caller to lock a mutex before the 
first call and keep it locked until after the final call of a sequence. But remember 
that no other thread can use the function until the mutex is unlocked. If the 
caller does a substantial amount of processing between calls, a major processing 
bottleneck can occur. Of course, this may also be difficult or impossible to inte- 
grate into a simple wrapper！the wrapper would have to be able to recognize the 
first and last of any series of calls. 
A better, but harder, way is to find some way to encapsulate the function (or a 
set of related functions) into a new thread-safe interface. There is no general 
model for this transformation, and in many cases it may be impossible. But often 
you just need to be creative, and possibly apply some constraints. While the 
library function may not be easy to encapsulate, you may be able to encapsulate 
"special cases" that you use. While strtok, for example, allows you to alter the 
token delimiters at each call, most code does not take advantage of this flexibility. 
Without the complication of varying delimiters, you could define a new token 
parsing model on top of strtok where all tokens in a string are found by a thread- 
safe setup function and stored where they can be retrieved one by one without 
calling strtok again. Thus, while the setup function would lock a common mutex 
and serialize access across all threads, the information retrieval function could 
run without any serialization. 
8 Hints to avoid debugging 
"Other maps are such shapes, with their islands and capes! 
But we've got our brave Captain to thank" 
(So the crew would protest) "that he's bought us the best！ 
A perfect and absolute blank!" 
！Lewis Carroll, The Hunting of the Snark 
Writing a complicated threaded program is a lot harder than writing a simple 
synchronous program, but once you learn the rules it is not much harder than 
writing a complicated synchronous program. Writing a threaded program to per- 
form a complicated asynchronous function will usually be easier than writing the 
same program using more traditional asynchronous programming techniques. 
The complications begin when you need to debug or analyze your threaded 
program. That's not so much because using threads is hard, but rather because 
the tools for debugging and analyzing threaded code are less well developed and 
understood than the programming interfaces. You may feel as if you are navigat- 
ing from a blank map. That doesn't mean you can't utilize the power of threaded 
programming right now, but it does mean that you need to be careful, and maybe 
a little more creative, in avoiding the rocks and shoals of the uncharted waters. 
Although this chapter mentions some thread debugging and analysis tools 
and suggests what you can accomplish with them, my goal isn't to tell you about 
tools you can use to solve problems. Instead, I will describe some of the common 
problems that you may encounter and impart something resembling "sage 
advice" on avoiding those problems before you have to debug them！or, perhaps 
more realistically, how to recognize which problems you may be encountering. 
I Check your assumptions at the door. 
Threaded programming is probably new to you. Asynchronous programming 
may be new to you. If so, you'll need to be careful about your assumptions. You've 
crossed a bridge, and behavior that's acceptable！or even required！in Synchro- 
nous Land can be dangerous across the river in Asynchronous Land. You can 
learn the new rules without a lot of trouble, and with practice you'll probably 
even feel comfortable with them. But you have to start by being constantly aware 
that something's changed. 
289 
290 CHAPTER 8 Hints to avoid debugging 
8.1 Avoiding incorrect code 
"For instance, now," she went on, sticking a large piece of plaster on her fin- 
ger as she spoke, "there's the King's Messenger. He's in prison now, 
being punished: and the trial doesn't even begin till next Wednesday: 
and of course the crime comes last of all." 
"Suppose he never commits the crime?" said Alice. 
"That would be all the better, wouldn't it?" the Queen said, as she bound the 
plaster round her finger with a bit of ribbon. 
！Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking-Glass 
Pthreads doesn't provide much assistance in debugging your threaded code. 
That is not surprising, since POSIX does not recognize the concept of debugging 
at all, even in explaining why the nearly universal sigtrap signal is not included 
in the standard. There is no standard way to interact with your program or 
observe its behavior as it runs, although every threaded system will provide some 
form of debugging tool. Even in the unlikely event that the developers of the sys- 
tem had no concern for you, the poor programmer, they needed to debug their 
own code. 
A vendor that provides threads with an operating system will provide at least a 
basic thread "observation window" in a debugging utility. You should expect at 
minimum the ability to display a list of the running threads and their current 
state, the state of mutexes and condition variables, and the stack trace of all 
threads. You should also be able to set breakpoints in specified threads and spec- 
ify a "current thread" to examine registers, variables, and stack traces. 
Because implementations of Pthreads are likely to maintain a lot of state in 
user mode, within the process, debugging using traditional UNIX mechanisms 
such as ptrace or the proc file system can be difficult. A common solution is to 
provide a special library that is called by the debugger, which knows how to 
search through the address space of the process being debugged to find the state 
of threads and synchronization objects. Solaris, for example, provides the 
libthread_db. so shared library, and Digital UNIX provides libpthreaddebug. so. 
A thread package placed on top of an operating system by a third party will 
not be able to provide much integration with a debugger. For example, the porta- 
ble "DCE threads" library provides a built-in debug command parser that you can 
invoke from the debugger using the print or call command to report the state of 
threads and synchronization objects within the process. This limited debugging 
support is at best inconvenient！you can't analyze thread state within a core file 
after a program has failed, and it cannot understand (or report) the symbolic 
names of program variables. 
* For historical reasons, the function is called cma_debug. Should you find yourself stuck 
with DCE threads code, try calling it, and enter the help command for a list of additional 
commands. 
Avoiding incorrect code 291 
The following sections describe some of the most common classes of threaded 
programming errors, with the intention of helping you to avoid these problems 
while designing, as well as possibly making it easier to recognize them while 
debugging. 
8.1.1 Avoid relying on "thread inertia" 
Always, always, remember that threads are asynchronous. That's especially 
important to keep in mind when you develop code on uniprocessor systems 
where threads may be "slightly synchronous." Nothing happens simultaneously 
on a uniprocessor, where ready threads are serially timesliced at relatively pre- 
dictable intervals. When you create a new thread on a uniprocessor or unblock a 
thread waiting for a mutex or condition variable, it cannot run immediately 
unless it has a higher priority than the creator or waker. 
The same phenomenon may occur even on a multiprocessor, if you have 
reached the "concurrency limit" of the process, for example, when you have more 
ready threads than there are processors. The creator, or the thread waking 
another thread, given equal priority, will continue running until it blocks or until 
the next timeslice (which may be many nanoseconds away). 
This means that the thread that currently has a processor has an advantage. 
It tends to remain in motion, exhibiting behavior vaguely akin to physical inertia. 
As a result, you may get away with errors that will cause your code to break in 
mysterious ways when the newly created or awakened thread is able to run 
immediately！when there are free processors. The following program, inertia.c, 
demonstrates how this phenomenon can disrupt your program. 
27-41 The question is one of whether the thread function printer_thread will see 
the value of stringPtr that was set before the call to pthread_create, or the 
value set after the call to pthread_create. The desired value is "After value." This 
is a very common class of programming error. Of course, in most cases the prob- 
lem is less obvious than in this simple example. Often, the variable is uninitialized, 
not set to some benign value, and the result may be data corruption or a segmen- 
tation fault. 
39 Now, notice the delay loop. Even on a multiprocessor, this program won't 
break all the time. The program will usually be able to change stringPtr before 
the new thread can begin executing！it takes time for a newly created thread to 
get into your code, after all, and the "window of opportunity" in this particular 
program is only a few instructions. The loop allows me to demonstrate the prob- 
lem by delaying the main thread long enough to give the printer thread time to 
start. If you make this loop long enough, you will see the problem even on a uni- 
processor, if main is eventually timesliced. 
| inertia.c 
1 #include <pthread.h> 
2 tinclude "errors.h" 
292 CHAPTER 8 Hints to avoid debugging 
3 
4 void *printer_thread (void *arg) 
5 { 
6 char *string = *(char**)arg; 
7 
8 printf ("%s\n", string); 
9 return NULL; 
10 } 
11 
12 int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
13 { 
14 pthread_t printer_id; 
15 char *string_ptr; 
16 int i, status; 
17 
18 #ifdef sun 
19 /* 
20 * On Solaris 2.5, threads are not timesliced. To ensure 
21 * that our two threads can run concurrently, we need to 
22 * increase the concurrency level to 2. 
23 */ 
24 DPRINTF (("Setting concurrency level to 2\n")); 
25 thr_setconcurrency B); 
26 #endif 
27 string_ptr = "Before value"; 
28 status = pthread_create ( 
29 &printer_id, NULL, printer_thread, (void*)&string_ptr); 
30 if (status != 0) 
31 err_abort (status, "Create thread"); 
32 
33 /* 
34 * Give the thread a chance to get started if it's going to run 
35 * in parallel, but not enough that the current thread is likely 
36 * to be timesliced. (This is a tricky balance, and the loop may 
37 * need to be adjusted on your system before you can see the bug.) 
38 */ 
39 for (i = 0; i < 10000000; i++); 
40 
41 string_ptr = "After value"; 
42 status = pthread_join (printer_id, NULL); 
43 if (status != 0) 
44 err_abort (status, "Join thread"); 
45 return 0; 
46 } 
| inertia.c 
The way to fix inertia.c is to set the "After value," the one you want the 
threads to see, before creating the thread. That's not so hard, is it? There may 
Avoiding incorrect code 293 
still be a "Before value," whether it is uninitialized storage or a value that was 
previously used for some other purpose, but the thread you create can't see it. By 
the memory visibility rules given in Section 3.4, the new thread sees all memory 
writes that occurred prior to the call into pthread_create. Always design your 
code so that threads aren't started until after all the resources they need have 
been created and initialized exactly the way you want the thread to see them. 
I Never assume that a thread you create will wait for you. 
You can cause yourself as many problems by assuming a thread will run 
"soon" as by assuming it won't run "too soon." Creating a thread that relies on 
"temporary storage" in the creator thread is almost always a bad idea. I have seen 
code that creates a series of threads, passing a pointer to the same local struc- 
ture to each, changing the structure member values each time. The problem is 
that you can't assume threads will start in any specific order. All of those threads 
may start after your last creation call, in which case they all get the last value of 
the data. Or the threads might start a little bit out of order, so that the first and 
second thread get the same data, but the others get what you intended them to get. 
Thread inertia is a special case of thread races. Although thread races are cov- 
ered much more extensively in Section 8.1.2, thread inertia is a subtle effect, and 
many people do not recognize it as a race. So test your code thoroughly on a mul- 
tiprocessor, if at all possible. Do this as early as possible during development, 
and continuously throughout development. Do this despite the fact that, espe- 
cially without a perfect threaded debugger, testing on a multiprocessor will be 
more difficult than debugging on a uniprocessor. And, of course, you should care- 
fully read the following section. 
8.1.2 Never bet your mortgage on a thread race 
A race occurs when two or more threads try to get someplace or do something 
at the same time. Only one can win. Which thread wins is determined by a lot of 
factors, not all of which are under your control. The outcome may be affected by 
how many processors are on the system, how many other processes are running, 
how much network overhead the system is handling, and other things like that. 
That's a nondeterministic race. It probably won't come out the same if you run 
the same program twice in a row. You don't want to bet on races like that.* 
I When you write threaded code, assume that at any arbitrary point, 
within any statement of your program, each thread may go to sleep for 
an unbounded period of time. 
* My daughter had this figured out by the time she was three！when she wanted to race, she 
told me ahead of time whether my job was to win or lose. There's really no point to leaving these 
important things to chance! 
294 CHAPTER 8 Hints to avoid debugging 
Processors may execute your threads at differing rates, depending on proces- 
sor load, interrupts, and so forth. Timeslicing on a processor may interrupt a 
thread at any point for an unspecified duration. During the time that a thread 
isn't running, any other thread may run and do anything that synchronization 
protocols in your code don't specifically prevent it from doing, which means that 
between any two instructions a thread may find an entirely different picture of 
memory, with an entirely different set of threads active. The way to protect a 
thread's view of the world from surprises is to rely only on explicit synchroniza- 
tion between threads. 
Most synchronization problems will probably show up pretty quickly if you're 
debugging on a multiprocessor. Threads with insufficient synchronization will 
compete for the honor of reaching memory last. It is a minor irony of thread races 
that the "loser" generally wins because the memory system will keep the last 
value written to an address. Sometimes, you won't notice a race at all. But some- 
times you'll get a mystifying wrong result, and sometimes you'll get a segmentation 
fault. 
Races are usually difficult to diagnose. The problem often won't occur at all on 
a uniprocessor system because races require concurrent execution. The level of 
concurrency on a uniprocessor, even with timeslicing, is fairly low, and often an 
unsynchronized sequence of writes will complete before another thread gets a 
chance to read the inconsistent data. Even on a multiprocessor, races may be dif- 
ficult to reproduce, and they often refuse to reveal themselves to a debugger. 
Races depend on the relative timing of thread execution！something a debugger 
is likely to change. 
Some races have more to do with memory visibility than with synchronization 
of multiple writes. Remember the basic rules of memory visibility (see Section 3.4): 
A thread can always see changes to memory that were performed by a thread pre- 
viously running on the same processor. On a uniprocessor all threads run on the 
same processor, which makes it difficult to detect memory visibility problems dur- 
ing debugging. On a multiprocessor, you may see visibility races only when the 
threads are scheduled on different processors while executing specific vulnerable 
sections of code. 
No ordering exists between threads 
unless you cause ordering. 
Bill Gallmeister's corollary: 
"Threads will run in the most evil order possible." 
You don't want to find yourself debugging thread races. You may never see the 
same outcome twice. The symptoms will change when you try to debug the code！ 
possibly by masquerading as an entirely different kind of problem, not just as the 
same problem in a different place. Even worse, the problem may never occur at 
all until a customer runs the code, and then it may fail every time, but only in the 
customer's immense, monolithic application, and only after it has been running 
Avoiding incorrect code 295 
for days. It will be running on a secured system with no network access, they will 
be unable to show you the proprietary code, and will be unable to reproduce the 
problem with a simple test program. 
I "Scheduling" is not the same as "synchronization." 
It may appear at first that setting a thread to the sched_fifo scheduling policy 
and maximum priority would allow you to avoid using expensive synchronization 
mechanisms by guaranteeing that no other thread can run until the thread blocks 
itself or lowers its priority. There are several problems with this, but the main 
problem is that it won't work on a multiprocessor. The SCHED_fifo policy prevents 
preemption by another thread, but on a multiprocessor other threads can run 
without any form of preemption. 
Scheduling exists to tell the system how important a specific job (thread) is to 
your application so it can schedule the job you need the most. Synchronization 
exists to tell the system that no other thread can be allowed into the critical sec- 
tion until the calling thread is done. 
In real life, a deterministic race, where the winner is guaranteed from the 
beginning, isn't very exciting (except to a three year old). But a deterministic race 
represents a substantially safer bet, and that's the kind of race you want to 
design into your programs. A deterministic race, as you can guess, isn't much of 
a race at all. It is more like waiting in line！nice, organized, and predictable. 
Excitement is overrated, especially when it comes to debugging complicated 
threaded applications. 
The simplest form of race is when more than one thread tries to write shared 
state without proper synchronization, for example, when two threads increment a 
shared counter. The two threads may fetch the same value from memory, incre- 
ment it independently, and store the same result into memory; the counter has 
been incremented by one rather than by two, and both threads have the same 
result value. 
A slightly more subtle race occurs when one thread is writing some set of 
shared data while another thread reads that data. If the reads occur in a different 
order, or if the reader catches up to the writer, then the reader may get inconsis- 
tent results. For example, one thread increments a shared array index and then 
writes data into the array element at that index. Another thread fetches the 
shared index before the writer has filled in the entire element and reads that ele- 
ment. The reader finds inconsistent data because the element hasn't been 
completely set up yet. It may take an unexpected code path because of something 
it sees there or it may follow a bad pointer. 
Always design and code assuming that threads are more asynchronous than 
you can imagine. Anyone who's written a lot of code knows that computers have 
little creatures that enjoy annoying you. Remember that when you code with 
threads there are lots of them loose at the same time. Take no chances, make no 
assumptions. Make sure any shared state is set up and visible before creating the 
thread that will use it; or create it using static mutexes or pthread_once. Use a 
296 CHAPTER 8 Hints to avoid debugging 
mutex to ensure that threads can't read inconsistent data. If you must share 
stack data between threads, be sure all threads that use the data have termi- 
nated before returning from the function that allocated the storage. 
"Sequence races" may occur when you assume some ordering of events, but 
that ordering isn't coded into the application. Sequence races can occur even 
when you carefully apply synchronization control to ensure data consistency. 
You can only avoid this kind of race by ensuring that ordering isn't important, or 
by adding code that forces everything to happen in the order it needs to happen. 
For example, imagine that three threads share a counter variable. Each will 
store a private copy of the current value and increment the shared counter. If the 
three threads are performing the same function, and none of them cares which 
value of the counter they get, then it is enough to lock a mutex around the fetch 
and increment operation. The mutex guarantees that each thread gets a distinct 
value, and no values are skipped. There's no race because none of the threads 
cares who wins. 
But if it matters which value each thread receives, that simple code will not do 
the job. For example, you might imagine that threads are guaranteed to start in 
the order in which they are created, so that the first thread gets the value 1, the 
second gets the value 2, and so forth. Once in a while (probably while you're 
debugging), the threads will get the value you expect, and everything will work, 
and at other times, the threads will happen to run in a different order. 
There are several ways to solve this. For example, you could assign each of the 
threads the proper value to begin with, by incrementing the counter in the thread 
that creates them and passing the appropriate value to each thread in a data 
structure. The best solution, though, is to avoid the problem by designing the 
code so that startup order doesn't matter. The more symmetrical your threads 
are, and the fewer assumptions they make about their environment, the less 
chance that this kind of race will happen. 
Races aren't always way down there at the level of memory address references, 
though. They can be anywhere. The traditional ANSI C library, for example, 
allows a number of sequence races when you use certain functions in an applica- 
tion with multiple threads. The readdir function, for example, relies on static 
storage within the function to maintain context across a series of identical calls to 
readdir. If one thread calls readdir while another thread is in the middle of a 
sequence of its own calls to readdir, the static storage will be overwritten with a 
new context. 
I "Sequence races" can occur even when all your code uses mutexes to 
protect shared data! 
This race occurs even if readdir is "thread aware" and locks a mutex to pro- 
tect the static storage. It is not a synchronization race, it is a sequence race. 
Thread A might call readdir to scan directory /usr/bin, for example, which locks 
the mutex, returns the first entry, and then unlocks the mutex. Thread B might 
then call readdir to scan directory /usr/include, which also locks the mutex, 
Avoiding incorrect code 297 
returns the first entry, and then unlocks the mutex. Now thread A calls readdir 
again expecting the second entry in /usr/bin; but instead it gets the second 
entry in /usr/include. No interface has behaved improperly, but the end result 
is wrong. The interface to readdir simply is not appropriate for use by threads. 
That's why Pthreads specifies a set of new reentrant functions, including 
readdir_r, which has an additional argument that is used to maintain context 
across calls. The additional argument solves the sequence race by avoiding any 
need for shared data. The call to readdir_r in thread A returns the first entry 
from /usr/bin in thread A's buffer, and the call to readdir_r in thread B returns 
the first entry from /usr/include in thread B's buffer . . . and the second call in 
thread A returns the second entry from /usr/bin in thread A's buffer. Refer to 
pipe. c, in Section 4.1, for a program that uses readdir_r. 
Sequence races can also be found at higher levels of coding. File descriptors in 
a process, for example, are shared across all threads. If two threads attempt to 
getc from the same file, each character in the file can go to only one thread. Even 
though getc itself is thread-safe, the sequence of characters seen by each thread 
is not deterministic！it depends on the ordering of each thread's independent 
calls to getc. They may alternate, each getting every second character through- 
out the file. Or one may get 2 or 100 characters in a row and then the other might 
get 1 character before being preempted for some reason. 
There are a number of ways you can resolve the getc race. You can open the 
file under two separate file descriptors and assign one to each thread. In that 
way, each thread sees every character, in order. That solves the race by removing 
the dependency on ordering. Or you can lock the file across the entire sequence of 
gets operations in each thread, which solves the race by enforcing the desired 
order. The program putchar.c, back in Section 6.4.2, shows a similar situation. 
Usually a program that doesn't care about ordering will run more efficiently 
than a program that enforces some particular ordering, first, because enforcing 
the ordering will always introduce computational overhead that's not directly 
related to getting the job done. Remember Amdahl's law. "Unordered" programs 
are more efficient because the greatest power of threaded programming is that 
things can happen concurrently, and synchronization prevents concurrency. 
Running an application on a multiprocessor system doesn't help much if most 
processors spend their time waiting for one to finish something. 
8.1.3 Cooperate to avoid deadlocks 
Like races, deadlocks are the result of synchronization problems in a pro- 
gram. While races are resource conflicts caused by insufficient synchronization, 
deadlocks are usually conflicts in the use of synchronization. A deadlock can 
happen when any two threads share resources. Essentially a deadlock occurs 
when thread A has resource 1 and can't continue until it has resource 2, while 
thread B has resource 2 and can't continue until it has resource 1. 
298 CHAPTER 8 Hints to avoid debugging 
The most common type of deadlock in a Pthreads program is mutex deadlock, 
where both resources are mutexes. There is one really important advantage of a 
deadlock over a race: It is much easier to debug the problem. In a race, the 
threads do something incorrectly and move on. The problem shows up sometime 
later, usually as a side effect. But in a deadlock the threads are still there waiting, 
and always will be！if they could go anywhere, it wouldn't be a deadlock. So when 
you attach to the process with the debugger or look at a crash dump, you can see 
what resources are involved. With a little detective work you can often determine 
why it happened. 
The most likely cause is a resource ordering inconsistency. The study of dead- 
locks goes way back to the early days of operating system design. Anyone who's 
taken computer science courses has probably run into the classic dining philoso- 
phers problem. Some philosophers sit at a round table with plates of spaghetti; 
each alternately eats and discusses philosophy. Although no utensils are required 
to discuss philosophy, each philosopher requires two forks to eat. The table is set 
with a single fork between each pair. The philosophers need to synchronize their 
eating and discussion to prevent deadlock. The most obvious form of deadlock is 
when all philosophers simultaneously pick up one fork each and refuse to put it 
down. 
There's always a way to make sure that your philosophers can all eat, eventu- 
ally. For example, a philosopher can take the fork to her right, and then look to 
her left. If the fork is available, she can take it and eat. If not, she should return 
the fork she's holding to the table and chat awhile. (That is the mutex backoff 
strategy discussed in Section 3.2.5.1.) Since the philosophers are all in a good 
mood and none has recently published papers severely critical of adjoining col- 
leagues, those who get to eat will in reasonably short order return both of their 
forks to the table so that their colleagues on each side can proceed. 
A more reliable (and more sanitary) solution is to skip the spaghetti and serve 
a dish that can be eaten with one fork. Mutex deadlocks can't happen if each 
thread has only one mutex locked at a time. It is a good idea to avoid calling func- 
tions with a mutex locked. First, if that function (or something it calls) locks 
another mutex, you could end up with a deadlock. Second, it is a good idea to 
lock mutexes for as short a time as possible (remember, locking a mutex prevents 
another thread from "eating"！that is, executing！concurrently). Calling printf, 
though, isn't likely to cause a deadlock in your code, because you don't lock any 
ANSI C library mutexes, and the ANSI C library doesn't lock any of your mutexes. 
If the call is into your own code, or if you call a library that may call back into 
your code, be careful. 
If you need to lock more than one mutex at a time, avoid deadlocks by using a 
strict hierarchy or a backoff algorithm. The main disadvantage of mutex backoff 
is that the backoff loop can run a long time if there are lots of other threads lock- 
ing the mutexes, even if they do so without any possibility of a deadlock. The 
backoff algorithm assumes that other threads may lock the first mutex after hav- 
ing locked one or more of the other mutexes. If all threads always lock mutexes in 
the order they're locked by the backoff loop, then you've got a fixed locking hierar- 
chy and you don't need the backoff algorithm. 
Avoiding incorrect code 299 
When a program has hung because of a deadlock, you require two important 
capabilities of your threaded debugger. First, it allows you to run your program in 
a mode where mutex ownership is recorded, and may be displayed using debug- 
ger commands. Finding a thread that is blocked on some mutex while it owns 
other mutexes is a good indication that you may have a deadlock. Second, you 
would like to be able to examine the call stack of threads that own mutexes to 
determine why the mutexes have remained locked. 
The call stack may not always be sufficient, though. One common cause of a 
deadlock is that some thread has returned from a function without unlocking a 
mutex. In this case, you may need a more sophisticated tool to trace the synchro- 
nization behavior of the program. Such a tool would allow you to examine the 
data and determine, for example, that function bad_lock locked a mutex and 
failed to unlock that mutex. 
8.1.4 Beware of priority inversion 
"Priority inversion" is a problem unique to applications (or libraries) that rely 
on realtime priority scheduling. Priority inversion involves at least three threads 
of differing priority. The differing priorities are important！priority inversion is a 
conflict between synchronization and scheduling requirements. Priority inversion 
allows a low-priority thread to indefinitely prevent a higher-priority thread from 
running. The result usually is not a deadlock (though it can be), but it is always 
a severe problem. See Section 5.5.4 for more about priority inversion. 
Most commonly, a priority inversion results from three threads of differing pri- 
ority sharing resources. One example of a priority inversion is when a low-priority 
thread locks a mutex, and is preempted by a high-priority thread, which then 
blocks on the mutex currently locked by the low-priority thread. Normally, the 
low-priority thread would resume, allowing it to unlock the mutex, which would 
unblock the high-priority thread to continue. However, if a medium-priority 
thread was awakened (possibly by some action of the high-priority thread), it 
might prevent the lower-priority thread from running. The medium-priority 
thread (or other threads it awakens) may indefinitely prevent the low-priority 
thread from releasing the mutex, so a high-priority thread is blocked by the 
action of a lower-priority thread. 
If the medium-priority thread blocks, the low-priority thread will be allowed to 
resume and release the mutex, at which point operation resumes. Because of 
this, many priority inversion deadlocks resolve themselves after a short time. If 
all priority inversion problems in a program reliably resolve themselves within a 
short time, the priority inversion may become a performance issue rather than a 
correctness issue. In either case, priority inversion can be a severe problem. 
Here are a few ideas to avoid priority inversion: 
? Avoid realtime scheduling entirely. That clearly is not practical in many 
realtime applications, however. 
300 CHAPTER 8 Hints to avoid debugging 
Design your threads so that threads of differing priority do not need to use 
the same mutexes. This may be impractical, too; many ANSI C functions, 
for example, use mutexes. 
Use priority ceiling mutexes (Section 5.5.5.1) or priority inheritance (Sec- 
tion 5.5.5.2). These are optional features of Pthreads and will not be 
available everywhere. Also, you cannot set the mutex priority protocol for 
mutexes you do not create, including those used by ANSI C functions. 
Avoid calling functions that may lock mutexes you didn't create in any 
thread with elevated priority. 
8.1.5 Never share condition variables between predicates 
Your code will usually be cleaner and more efficient if you avoid using a single 
condition variable to manage more than one predicate condition. You should not, 
for example, define a single "queue" condition variable that is used to awaken 
threads waiting for the queue to become empty and also threads waiting for an 
element to be added to the queue. 
But this isn't just a performance issue (or it would be in another section). If 
you use pthread_cond_signal to wake threads waiting on these shared condition 
variables, the program may hang with threads waiting on the condition variable 
and nobody left to wake them up. 
Why? Because you can only signal a condition variable when you know that a 
single thread needs to be awakened, and that any thread waiting on the condition 
variable may be chosen. When multiple predicates share a condition variable, you 
can never be sure that the awakened thread was waiting for the predicate you set. 
If it was not, then it will see a spurious wakeup and wait again. Your signal has 
been lost, because no thread waiting for your predicate had a chance to see that 
it had changed. 
It is not enough for a thread to resignal the condition variable when it gets a 
spurious wakeup, either. Threads may not wake up in the order they waited, espe- 
cially when you use priority scheduling. "Resignaling" might result in an infinite 
loop with a few high-priority threads (all with the wrong predicate) alternately wak- 
ing each other up. 
The best solution, when you really want to share a condition variable between 
predicates, is always to use pthread_cond_broadcast. But when you broadcast, 
all waiting threads wake up to reevaluate their predicates. You always know that 
one set or the other cannot proceed！so why make them all wake up to find out? 
If 1 thread is waiting for write access, for example, and 100 are waiting for read 
access, all 101 threads must wake up when the broadcast means that it is now 
OK to write, but only the one writer can proceed！the other 100 threads must 
wait again. The result of this imprecision is a lot of wasted context switches, and 
there are more useful ways to keep your computer busy. 
Avoiding incorrect code 301 
8.1.6 Sharing stacks and related memory corrupters 
There's nothing wrong with sharing stack memory between threads. That is, it 
is legal and sometimes reasonable for a thread to allocate some variable on its 
own stack and communicate that address to one or more other threads. A cor- 
rectly written program can share stack addresses with no risk at all; however 
(this may come as a surprise), not every program is written correctly, even when 
you want it to be correct. Sharing stack addresses can make small programming 
errors catastrophic, and these errors can be very difficult to isolate. 
I Returning from the function that allocates shared stack memory, when 
other threads may still use that data, will result in undesirable behavior. 
If you share stack memory, you must ensure that it is never possible for the 
thread that owns the stack to "pop" that shared memory from the stack until all 
other threads have forever ceased to make use of the shared data. Should the 
owning thread return from a stack frame containing the data, for example, the 
owning thread may call another function and thereby reallocate the space occu- 
pied by the shared variable. One or both of the following possible outcomes will 
eventually be observed: 
1. Data written by another thread will be overwritten with saved register val- 
ues, a return PC, or whatever. The shared data has been corrupted. 
2. Saved register values, return PC, or whatever will be overwritten by 
another thread modifying the shared data. The owning thread's call frame 
has been corrupted. 
Having carefully ensured that there is no possible way for the owning thread 
to pop the stack data while other threads are using the shared data, are you safe? 
Maybe not. We're stretching the point a little, but remember, we're talking about a 
programming error！maybe a silly thing like failing to initialize a pointer variable 
declared with auto storage class, for example. A pointer to the shared data must 
be stored somewhere to be useful！other threads have no other way to find the 
proper stack address. At some point, the pointer is likely to appear in various 
locations on the stack of every thread that uses the data. None of these pointers 
will necessarily be erased when the thread ceases to make use of the stack. 
Writes through uninitialized pointers are a common programming error, 
regardless of threads, so to some extent this is nothing new or different. However, 
in the presence of threads and shared stack data, each thread has an opportu- 
nity to corrupt data used by some other thread asynchronously. The symptoms of 
that corruption may not appear until some time later, which can pose a particu- 
larly difficult debugging task. 
If, in your program, sharing stack data seems convenient, then by all means 
take advantage of the capability. But if something unexpected happens during 
debugging, start by examining the code that shares stack data particularly care- 
fully. If you routinely use an analysis tool that reports use of uninitialized 
variables (such as Third Degree on Digital UNIX), you may not need to worry 
about this class of problem！or many others. 
302 CHAPTER 8 Hints to avoid debugging 
8.2 Avoiding performance problems 
"Well, in our country," said Alice, still panting a little, "you'd generally 
get to somewhere else！if you ran very fast for a long time as we've 
been doing." 
"A slow sort of country!" said the Queen. "Now, here, you see, it takes all the 
running you can do, to keep in the same place. If you want to get some- 
where else, you must run at least twice as fast as that!" 
！Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking-Glass 
Sometimes, once a program works, it is "done." At least, until you want to 
make it do something else. In many cases, though, "working" isn't good enough. 
The program needs to meet performance goals. Sometimes the performance goals 
are clear: "must perform so many transactions in this period of time." Other 
times, the goals are looser: "must be very fast." 
This section gives pointers on determining how fast you're going, what's slow- 
ing you up, and how to tell (maybe) when you're going as fast as you can go. 
There are some very good tools to help you, and there will be a lot more as the 
industry adjusts to supporting eager and outspoken thread programmers. But 
there are no portable standards for threaded analysis tools. If your vendor sup- 
ports threads, you'll probably find at least a thread-safe version of prof, which is 
a nearly universal UNIX tool. Each system will probably require different switches 
and environments to use it safely for threads, and the output will differ. 
Performance tuning requires more than just answering the traditional ques- 
tion, "How much time does the application spend in each function?" You have to 
analyze contention on mutexes, for example. Mutexes with high contention may 
need to be split into several mutexes controlling more specialized data (finer- 
grain concurrency), which can improve performance by increasing concurrency. 
If finer grain mutexes have low contention, combining them may improve perfor- 
mance by reducing locking overhead. 
8.2.1 Beware of concurrent serialization 
The ideal parallel code is a set of tasks that is completely compute-bound. 
They never synchronize, they never block！they just "think." If you start with a 
program that calls three compute-bound functions in series, and change it to 
create three threads each running one of those functions, the program will run 
(nearly) three times faster. At least, it should do so if you're running on a multi- 
processor with at least three CPUs that are, at that moment, allocated for your 
use. 
The ideal concurrent code is a set of tasks that is completely I/O-bound. They 
never synchronize, and do little computation！they just issue I/O requests and 
wait for them. If you start with a program that writes chunks of data to three 
Avoiding performance problems 303 
separate files (ideally, on three separate disks, with separate controllers), and 
change it to create three threads, each writing one of those chunks of data, all 
three I/O operations can progress simultaneously. 
But what if you've gone to all that trouble to write a set of compute-bound par- 
allel or I/O-bound concurrent threads and it turns out that you've just converted 
a straight-line serialized program into a multithreaded serialized program? The 
result will be a slower program that accomplishes the same result with substan- 
tially more overhead. Most likely, that is not what you intended. How could that 
have happened? 
Let's say that your compute-bound operations call malloc and free in their 
work. Those functions modify the static process state, so they need to perform 
some type of synchronization. Most likely, they lock a mutex. If your threads run 
in a loop calling malloc and free, such that a substantial amount of their total 
time may be spent within those functions, you may find that there's very little 
real parallelism. The threads will spend a lot of time blocked on the mutex while 
one thread or another allocates or frees memory. 
Similarly, the concurrent I/O threads may be using serialized resources. If the 
threads perform "concurrent" I/O using the same stdio file stream, for example, 
they will be locking mutexes to update the stream's shared buffer. Even if the 
threads are using separate files, if they are on the same disk there will be locking 
within the file system to synchronize the file cache and so forth. Even when using 
separate disks, true concurrency may be subject to limitations in the I/O bus or 
disk controller subsystems. 
The point of all this is that writing a program that uses threads doesn't magi- 
cally grant parallelism or even concurrency to your application. When you're 
analyzing performance, be aware that your program can be affected by factors 
that aren't within your control. You may not even be able to see what's happening 
in the file system, but what you can't see can hurt you. 
8.2.2 Use the right number of mutexes 
The first step in making a library thread-safe may be to create a "big mutex" 
that protects all entries into the library. If only one thread can execute within the 
library at a time, then most functions will be thread-safe. At least, no static data 
will be corrupted. If the library has no persistent state that needs to remain con- 
sistent across a series of calls, the big mutex may seem to be enough. Many 
libraries are left in this state. The standard XI1 client library (Xlib) provides lim- 
ited support for this big mutex approach to thread-safety, and has for years. 
But thread-safety isn't enough anymore！now you want the library to perform 
well with threads. In most cases, that will require redesigning the library so that 
multiple threads can use it at the same time. The big mutex serializes all opera- 
tions in the library, so you are getting no concurrency or parallelization within 
the library. If use of that library is the primary function of your threads, the pro- 
gram would run faster with a single thread and no synchronization. That big 
304 CHAPTER 8 Hints to avoid debugging 
mutex in Xlib, remember, keeps all other threads from using any Xlib function 
until the first thread has received its response from the server, and that might 
take quite a while. 
Map out your library functions, and determine what operations can reason- 
ably run in parallel. A common strategy is to create a separate mutex for each 
data structure, and use those mutexes to serialize access to the shared data, 
rather than using the "big mutex" to serialize access to the library. 
With a profiler that supports threads, you can determine that you have too 
much mutex activity, by looking for hot spots within calls to pthread_mutex_ 
lock, pthread_mutex_unlock, and pthread_mutex_trylock. However, this data 
will not be conclusive, and it may be very difficult to determine whether the high 
activity is due to too much mutex contention or too much locking without conten- 
tion. You need more specific information on mutex contention and that requires 
special tools. Some thread development systems provide detailed visual tracing 
information that shows synchronization costs. Others provide "metering" infor- 
mation on individual mutexes to tell how many times the mutex was locked, and 
how often threads found the mutex already locked. 
8.2.2.1 Too many mutexes will not help 
Beware, too, of exchanging a "big" mutex for lots of "tiny" mutexes. You may 
make matters worse. Remember, it takes time to lock a mutex, and more time to 
unlock that mutex. Even if you increase parallelism by designing a locking hier- 
archy that has very little contention, your threads may spend so much time 
locking and unlocking all those mutexes that they get less real work done. 
Locking a mutex also affects the memory subsystem. In addition to the time 
you spend locking and unlocking, you may decrease the efficiency of the memory 
system by excessive locking. Locking a mutex, for example, might invalidate a 
block of cache on all processors. It might stall all bus activity within some range 
of physical addresses. 
So find out where you really need mutexes. For example, in the previous sec- 
tion I suggested creating a separate mutex for each data structure. Yet, if two 
data structures are usually used together, or if one thread will hardly ever need to 
use one data structure while another thread is using the second data structure, 
the extra mutex may decrease your overall performance. 
8.2.3 Never fight over cache lines 
No modern computer reads data directly from main memory. Memory that is 
fast enough to keep up with the computer is too expensive for that to be practi- 
cal. Instead, data is fetched by the memory management unit into a fast local 
cache array. When the computer writes data, that, too, goes into the local cache 
array. The modified data may also be written to main memory immediately or 
may be "flushed" to memory only when needed. 
Avoiding performance problems 305 
So if one processor in a multiprocessor system needs to read a value that 
another processor has in its cache, there must be some "cache coherency" mech- 
anism to ensure that it can find the correct data. More importantly, when one 
processor writes data to some location, all other processors that have older copies 
of that location in cache need to copy the new data, or record that the old data is 
invalid. 
Computer systems commonly cache data in relatively large blocks of 64 or 128 
bytes. That can improve efficiency by optimizing the references to slow main 
memory. It also means that, when the same 64- or 128-byte block is cached by 
multiple processors, and one processor writes to any part of that block, all pro- 
cessors caching the block must throw away the entire block. 
This has serious implications for high-performance parallel computation. If 
two threads access different data within the same cache block, no thread will be 
able to take advantage of the (fast) cached copy on the processor it is using. Each 
read will require a new cache fill from main memory, slowing down the program. 
Cache behavior may vary widely even on different computer systems using the 
same microprocessor chip. It is not possible to write code that is guaranteed to be 
optimal on all possible systems. You can substantially improve your chances, 
however, by being very careful to align and separate any performance-critical data 
used by multiple threads. 
You can optimize your code for a particular computer system by determining 
the cache characteristics of that system, and designing your code so that no two 
threads will ever need to write to the same cache block within performance- 
critical parallel loops. About the best you can hope to do without optimizing for a 
particular system would be to ensure that each thread has a private, page- 
aligned, segment of data. It is highly unlikely that any system would use a cache 
block as large as a page, because a page includes far too much varied data to pro- 
vide any performance advantage in the memory management unit. 
9 POSIX threads mini-reference 
This chapter is a compact reference to the POSIX. lc standard. 
9.1 POSIX 1003.1 c-1995 options 
Pthreads is intended to address a wide variety of audiences. High-performance 
computational programs can use it to support parallel decomposition of loops. 
Realtime programs can use it to support concurrent realtime I/O. Database and 
network servers can use it to easily support concurrent clients. Business or soft- 
ware development programs can use it to take advantage of parallel and concurrent 
operations on time-sharing systems. 
The Pthreads standard allows you to determine which optional capabilities are 
provided by the system, by defining a set of feature-test macros, which are shown 
in Table 9.1. Any implementation of Pthreads must inform you whether each 
option is supported, by three means: 
? By making a formal statement of support in the POSIX Conformance Doc- 
ument. You can use this information to help design your application to 
work on specific systems. 
? By defining compile-time symbolic constants in the <unistd. h> header file. 
You can test for these symbolic constants using #ifdef or #ifndef prepro- 
cessor conditionals to support a variety of Pthreads systems. 
? By returning a positive nonzero value when the sysconf function is called 
with the associated sysconf symbol. (This is not usually useful for the 
"feature-test" macros that specify whether options are present！if they are 
not, the associated interfaces usually are not supplied, and your code will 
not link, and may not even compile.) 
You might, for example, choose to avoid relying on priority scheduling because 
after reading the conformance documents you discovered that three out of the 
four systems you wish to support do not provide the feature. Or you might prefer 
to use priority inheritance for your mutexes on systems that provide the feature, 
but write the code so that it will not try to access the mutex protocol attribute on 
systems that do not provide that option. 
307 
308 
CHAPTER 9 POSIX threads mini-reference 
Symbolic constant, 
sysconf symbol name 
POSIX THREADS 
_SC_THREADS 
POSIX THREAD ATTR STACKSIZE 
_SC_THREAD_ATTR STACKSIZE 
POSIX THREAD ATTR STACKADDR 
_SC_THREAD_ATTR_STACKADDR 
POSIX THREAD PRIORITY SCHEDULING 
_SC_THREAD_PRIORITY_SCHEDULING 
POSIX THREAD PRIO INHERIT 
_SC_THREAD_PRIO INHERIT 
POSIX THREAD PRIO PROTECT 
_SC_THREAD_PRIO_PROTECT 
_POSIX THREAD PROCESS SHARED 
_SC_THREAD_PROCESS_SHARED 
POSIX THREAD SAFE FUNCTIONS 
_SC_THREAD_SAFE_FUNCTIONS 
Description 
You can use threads (if your system 
doesn't define this, you're out of luck). 
You can control the size of a thread's 
stack. 
You can allocate and control a 
thread's stack. 
You can use realtime scheduling. 
You can create priority inheritance 
mutexes. 
You can create priority ceiling mutexes. 
You can create mutexes and condition 
variables that can be shared with an- 
other process. 
You can use the special "_r" library 
functions that provide thread-safe 
behavior. 
TABLE 9.1 POSIX 1003.lc-1995 options 
9.2 POSIX 1003.lc-1995 limits 
The Pthreads standard allows you to determine the run-time limits of the sys- 
tem that may affect your application, for example, how many threads you can 
create, by defining a set of macros, which are shown in Table 9.2. Any implemen- 
tation of Pthreads must inform you of its limits, by three means: 
? By making a formal statement in the POSIX Conformance Document. You 
can use this information to help design your application to work on specific 
systems. 
? By defining compile-time symbolic constants in the <limits. h> header file. 
The symbolic constant may be omitted from <limits.h> when the limit is 
at least as large as the required minimum, but cannot be determined at 
compile time, for example, if it depends on available memory space. You 
can test for these symbolic constants using #ifdef or #ifndef preproces- 
sor conditionals. 
? By returning a positive nonzero value when the sysconf function is called 
with the associated sysconf symbol. 
You might, for example, design your application to rely on no more than 64 
threads, if the conformance documents showed that three out of the four systems 
POSIX 1003.1c-1995 interfaces 
309 
Run-time invariant values, 
sysconf symbol name 
Description 
PTHREAD DESTRUCTOR ITERATIONS 
_SC_THREAD_DESTRUCTOR_ITERATIONS 
PTHREAD KEYS MAX 
_SC_THREAD_KEYS_MAX 
PTHREAD STACK MIN 
SC THREAD STACK MIN 
PTHREAD THREADS MAX 
_SC_THREAD_THREADS_MAX 
Maximum number of attempts to 
destroy a thread's thread-specific data 
on termination (must be at least 4). 
Maximum number of thread-specific 
data keys available per process (must 
be at least 128). 
Minimum supported stack size for a 
thread. 
Maximum number of threads support- 
ed per process (must be at least 64). 
TABLE 9.2 POSIX 1003.1 c-1995 limits 
you wish to support do not support additional threads. Or you might prefer to 
write conditional code that relies on the value of the pthread_threads_max sym- 
bolic constant (if defined) or call sysconf to determine the limit at run time. 
9.3 POSIX 1003.1 c-1995 interfaces 
The interfaces are sorted by functional categories: threads, mutexes, and so 
forth. Within each category, the interfaces are listed in alphabetical order. 
Figure 9.1 describes the format of the entries. 
First, the header entry A) shows the name of the interface. If the interface is 
an optional feature of Pthreads, then the name of the feature-test macro for that 
? r 
? 
pthread_mutexattr_getpshared [_posixjthread_process_shared] 
int pthread_mutexattr_getpshared ( 
const pthread_mutexattr_t *attr, 
int *pshared); 
Determine whether mutexes created with attr can be shared by multiple processes. 
psbared 
PTHREAD_PROCESS_SHARED May be shared if in shared 
memory. 
pthread process PRIVATE Cannot be shared. 
? 
? 
'? 
References: 3.2,5.2.1 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [EINVAL] attr invalid. 
Hint: pshared mutexes must be allocated in shared memory. 
FIGURE 9.1 Mini-reference format 
310 CHAPTER 9 POSIX threads mini-reference 
option is shown at the end of the line, in brackets. The interface pthread_ 
mutexattr_getpshared, for example, is an option under the _POSIX_THREAD_ 
process_shared feature. 
The prototype entry B) shows the full C language prototype for the interface, 
describing how to call the function, with all argument types. 
The description entry C) gives a brief synopsis of the interface. In this case, 
the purpose of the interface is to specify whether mutexes created using the 
attributes object can be shared between multiple processes. 
Functions with arguments that have symbolic values, like pshared in this 
example, will include a table D) that describes each possible value. The default 
value of the argument (the state of a new thread, or the default value of an 
attribute in a new attributes object, in this case pthread_process_private) is 
indicated by showing the name in bold. 
The references entry E) gives cross-references to the primary sections of this 
book that discuss the interface, or other closely related interfaces. 
The headers entry F) shows the header files needed to compile code using the 
function. If more than one header is shown, you need all of them. 
The errors entry G) describes each of the possible error numbers returned by 
the interface; Because Pthreads distinguishes between mandatory error detection 
("if occurs" in POSIX terms) and optional error detection ("if detected" in POSIX 
terms), the errors that an interface must report (if they occur) are shown in bold 
(see Section 9.3.1 for details on Pthreads errors). 
The hint entry (8) gives a single, and inevitably oversimplified, philosophical 
comment regarding the interface. Some hints point out common errors in using 
the interface; others describe something about the designers' intended use of the 
interface, or some fundamental restriction of the interface. In pthread_mutexattr_ 
getpshared, for example, the hint points out that a mutex created to be "process 
shared" must be allocated in shared memory that's accessible by all participating 
processes. 
9.3.1 Error detection and reporting 
The POSIX standard distinguishes carefully between two categories of error: 
1. Mandatory ("if occurs") errors involve circumstances beyond the control of 
the programmer. These errors must always be detected and reported by the 
system using a particular error code. If you cannot create a new thread 
because your process lacks sufficient virtual memory, then the implemen- 
tation must always tell you. You can't possibly be expected to check 
whether there's enough memory before creating the thread！for one thing, 
you have no way to know how much memory would be required. 
2. Optional ("if detected") errors are problems that are usually your mistake. 
You might try to lock a mutex that hadn't been initialized, for example, or 
try to unlock a mutex that's locked by another thread. Some systems may 
POSIX 1003. lc-1995 interfaces 311 
not detect these errors, but they're still errors in your code, and you ought 
to be able to avoid them without help from the system. 
While it would be "nice" for the system to detect optional errors and return the 
appropriate error number, sometimes it takes a lot of time to check or is difficult 
to check reliably. It may be expensive, for example, for the system to determine 
the identity of the current thread. Systems may therefore not remember which 
thread locked a mutex, and would be unable to detect that the unlock was erro- 
neous. It may not make sense to slow down the basic synchronization operations 
for correct programs just to make it a little easier to debug incorrect programs. 
Systems may provide debugging modes where some or all of the optional 
errors are detected. Digital UNIX, for example, provides "error check" mutexes 
and a "metered" execution mode, where the ownership of mutexes is always 
tracked and optional errors in locking and unlocking mutexes are reported. The 
UNIX98 specification includes "error check" mutexes (Section 10.1.2), so they will 
soon be available on most UNIX systems. 
9.3.2 Use of void* type 
ANSI C requires that you be allowed to convert any pointer type to void* and 
back, with the result being identical to the original value. However, ANSI C does 
not require that all pointer types have the same binary representation. Thus, a 
long* that you convert to void* in order to pass into a thread's start routine 
must always be used as a long*, not as, for example, a char*. In addition, the 
result of converting between pointer and integer types is "implementation 
defined." Most systems supporting UNIX will allow you to cast an integer value to 
void* and back, and to mix pointer types！but be aware that the code may not 
work on all systems. 
Some other standards, notably the POSIX. lb realtime standard, have solved 
the same problem (the need for an argument or structure member that can take 
any type value) in different ways. The sigevent structure in POSIX. lb, for exam- 
ple, includes a member that contains a value to be passed into a signal-catching 
function, called sigev_value. Instead of defining sigev_value as a void*, how- 
ever, and relying on the programmer to provide proper type casting, the sigev_ 
value member is a union sigval, containing overlayed int and void* members. 
This mechanism avoids the problem of converting between integer and pointer 
types, eliminating one of the conflicts with ANSI C guarantees. 
9.3.3 Threads 
Threads provide concurrency, the ability to have more than one "stream of 
execution" within a process at the same time. Each thread has its own hardware 
registers and stack. All threads in a process share the full virtual address space, 
plus all file descriptors, signal actions, and other process resources. 
312 
CHAPTER 9 POSIX threads mini-reference 
I pthread_attr_destroy 
int pthread_attr_destroy ( 
pthread_attr_t *attr); 
Destroy a thread attributes object. The object can no longer be used. 
References: 2, 5.2.3 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [EINVAL] attr is invalid. 
Hint: Does not affect threads created using attr. 
I pthread_attr_getdetachstate 
int pthread_attr_getdetachstate ( 
const pthread_attr_t *attr, 
int *detachstate); 
Determine whether threads created with attr will run detached 
detachstate 
PTHREAD CREATE JOINABLE 
_ _ Thread ID is valid, must be 
joined. 
pthread_create_detached Thread ID is invalid, cannot be 
joined, canceled, or modified. 
References: 2, 5.2.3 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [EINVAL] attr is invalid. 
Hint: You can't join or cancel detached threads. 
pthread_attr_getstackaddr [_posix_thread_attr_stackaddr] 
int pthread_attr_getstackaddr ( 
const pthread_attr_t *attr, 
void **stackaddr); 
Determine the address of the stack on which threads created with attr will run. 
References: 2, 5.2.3 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [EINVAL] attr is invalid. 
[ENOSYS] stacksize not supported. 
Hint: Create only one thread for each stack address! 
POSIX 1003.1 c-1995 interfaces 
313 
pthread_attr_getstacksize [_posix_thread_attr_stacksize] 
int pthread_attr_getstacksize ( 
const pthread_attr_t *attr, 
size_t *stacksize); 
Determine the size of the stack on which threads created with attr will run. 
References: 2, 5.2.3 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [EINVAL] attr invalid. 
[ENOSYS] stacksize not supported. 
Hint: Use on newly created attributes object to find the default stack size. 
pthread_attr_init 
int pthread_attr_init ( 
pthread_attr_t *attr); 
Initialize a thread attributes object with default attributes. 
References: 2, 5.2.3 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [ENOMEM] insufficient memory for attr. 
Hint: Use to define thread types. 
I pthread_attr_setdetachstate 
int pthread_attr_setdetachstate ( 
pthread_attr_t *attr, 
int detachstate); 
Specify whether threads created with attr will run detached. 
detachstate 
Thread ID is valid, must be 
joined. 
Thread ID is invalid, cannot be 
joinerl. c.-inri'leri. 'T 
PTHREAD_CREATE_JOINABLE 
PTHREAD CREATE DETACHED 
References: 2, 5.2.3 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [EINVAL] attr invalid. 
I EINVAL] detachstate invalid. 
Hint: You can't join or cancel detached threads. 
314 CHAPTER 9 POSDC threads mini-reference 
pthread_attr_setstackaddr [_posix_thread_attr_stackaddr] 
int pthread_attr_setstackaddr ( 
pthread_attr_t *attr, 
void *stackaddr); 
Threads created with attr will run on the stack starting at stackaddr. Must be at 
least pthread_STACK_min bytes. 
References: 2, 5.2.3 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [EINVAL] attr invalid. 
[ENOSYS] stackaddr not supported. 
Hint: Create only one thread for each stack address, and be careful of 
stack alignment. 
pthread_attr_setstacksize [_posix_thread_attr_stacksize ] 
int pthread_attr_setstacksize ( 
pthread_attr_t *attr, 
size_t stacksize); 
Threads created with attr will run on a stack of at least stacksize bytes. Must be 
at least pthread_stack_min bytes. 
References: 2, 5.2.3 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [EINVAL] attr or stacksize invalid. 
[EINVAL] stacksize too small or too big. 
[ENOSXS] stacksize not supported. 
Hint: Find the default first (pthread_attr_getstacksize), then increase 
by multiplying. Use only if a thread needs more than the default. 
pthread_create 
int pthread create ( 
pthread t 
const pthread attr t 
void 
void 
*tid, 
*attr. 
*(*start) 
*arq); 
(void *), 
Create a thread running the start function, essentially an asynchronous call to the 
function start with argument value arg. The attr argument specifies optional 
creation attributes, and the identification of the new thread is returned intid. 
References: 2, 5.2.3 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [EINVAL] attr invalid. 
[EA6AIN] insufficient resources. 
Hint: All resources needed by thread must already be initialized. 
POSIX 1003.1 c-1995 interfaces 315 
I pthread_detach 
int pthread_detach ( 
pthread_t thread); 
Detach the thread. Use this to detach the main thread or to "change your mind" 
after creating a joinable thread in which you are no longer interested. 
References: 2, 5.2.3 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [EINVAL] thread is not a joinable thread. 
[ESRCH] no thread could be found for ID thread. 
Hint: Detached threads cannot be joined or canceled; storage is freed 
immediately on termination. 
I pthread_equal 
int pthread_equal ( 
pthread_t tl, 
pthread_t t2) ; 
Return value 0 if tl and t2 are equal, otherwise return nonzero. 
References: 2, 5.2.3 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Hint: Compare pthread_self against stored thread identifier. 
I pthread_exit 
int pthread_exit ( 
void *value_ptr); 
Terminate the calling thread, returning the value value_ptr to any joining thread. 
References: 2, 5.2.3 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Hint: value_ptr is treated as a value, not the address of a value. 
pthreadjoin 
int pthread_join ( 
pthread_t thread, 
void **value_ptr); 
Wait for thread to terminate, and return thread's exit value if value_ptr is not 
null. This also detaches thread on successful completion. 
References: 2, 5.2.3 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [einvalj thread is not a joinable thread. 
[ESRCH] no thread could be found for ID thread. 
[edeadlk] attempt to join with self. 
Hint: Detached threads cannot be joined or canceled. 
316 CHAPTER 9 POSIX threads mini-reference 
I pthread_self 
pthread_t pthread_self (void); 
Return the calling thread's ID. 
References: 2, 5.2.3 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Hint: Use to set thread's scheduling parameters. 
sched_yield 
int sched_yield (void); 
Make the calling thread ready, after other ready threads of the same priority, and 
select a new thread to run. This can allow cooperating threads of the same priority 
to share processor resources more equitably, especially on a uniprocessor. This 
function is from POSIX. lb (realtime extensions), and is declared in <sched.h>. It 
reports errors by setting the return value to -1 and storing an error code in errno. 
References: 2, 5.2.3 
Headers: <sched.h> 
Errors: [ENOSYS] sched_yield not supported. 
Hint: Use before locking mutex to reduce chances of a timeslice while mu- 
tex is locked. 
9.3.4 Mutexes 
Mutexes provide synchronization, the ability to control how threads share 
resources. You use mutexes to prevent multiple threads from modifying shared 
data at the same time, and to ensure that a thread can read consistent values for 
a set of resources (for example, memory) that may be modified by other threads. 
I pthread_mutexattr_destroy 
int pthread_mutexattr_destroy ( 
pthread_mutexattr_t *attr); 
Destroy a mutex attributes object. The object can no longer be used. 
References: 3.2, 5.2.1 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [EINVAL] attr invalid. 
Hint: Does not affect mutexes created using attr. 
POSIX 1003.1C-1995 interfaces 
317 
pthread_mutexattr_getpshared [_posix_thread_process_shared] 
int pthread_mutexattr_getpshared ( 
const pthread_mutexattr_t *attr, 
int *pshared); 
Determine whether mutexes created with attr can be shared by multiple processes. 
pshared 
PTHREAD PROCESS SHARED 
PTHREAD PROCESS PRIVATE 
May be shared if in shared 
memory. 
Cannot be shared. 
References: 3.2,5.2.1 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [EINVAL] attr invalid. 
Hint: pshared mutexes must be allocated in shared memory. 
pthread_mutexattr_init 
int pthread_mutexattr_init ( 
pthread_mutexattr_t *attr); 
Initialize a mutex attributes object with default attributes. 
References: 3.2, 5.2.1 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [enomem] insufficient memory for attr. 
Hint: Use to define mutex types. 
pthread_mutexattr_setpshared [_posix_thread_process_shared] 
int pthread_mutexattr_setpshared ( 
pthread_mutexattr_t *attr, 
int pshared); 
Mutexes created with attr can be shared between processes if the pthread_mutex_t 
variable is allocated in memory shared by the processes. 
PTHREAD_PROCESS_SHARED 
PTHREAD PROCESS PRIVATE 
pshared 
May be shared if in shared 
memory. 
Cannot be shared. 
References: 3.2,5.2.1 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [EINVAL] attr or detachstate invalid. 
Hint: pshared mutexes must be allocated in shared memory. 
318 CHAPTER 9 POSIX threads mini-reference 
I pthread_mutex_destroy 
int pthread_mutex_destroy ( 
pthread_mutex_t *mutex); 
Destroy a mutex that you no longer need. 
References: 3.2,5.2.1 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [EBUSY] mutex is in use. 
[EINVAL] mutex is invalid. 
Hint: Safest after unlocking mutex, when no other threads will lock. 
I pthread_mutex_init 
int pthread_mutex_init ( 
pthread_mutex_t *mutex, 
const pthread_mutexattr_t *attr); 
Initialize a mutex. The attr argument specifies optional creation attributes. 
References: 3.2, 5.2.1 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [EAGAiN] insufficient resources (other than memory). 
[ENOMEM] insufficient memory. 
[EPERM] no privilege to perform operation. 
[EBUSY] mutex is already initialized. 
[EINVAL] attr is invalid. 
Hint: Use static initialization instead, if possible. 
pthread_mutex_lock 
int pthread_mutex_lock ( 
pthread_mutex_t *mutex); 
Lock a mutex. If the mutex is currently locked, the calling thread is blocked until 
mutex is unlocked. On return, the thread owns the mutex until it calls pthread_ 
mutex_unlock. 
References: 3.2, 5.2.1 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [EINVAL] thread priority exceeds mutex priority ceiling. 
[EINVAL] mutex is invalid. 
[EDEADLK] calling thread already owns mutex. 
Hint: Always unlock within the same thread. 
POSIX 1003. lc-1995 interfaces 319 
I pthread_mutex_trylock 
int pthread_mutex_trylock ( 
pthread_mutex_t *mutex); 
Lock a mutex. If the mutex is currently locked, returns immediately with EBUSY. Oth- 
erwise, calling thread becomes owner until it unlocks. 
References: 3.2, 5.2.1 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [EINVAL] thread priority exceeds rnutex priority ceiling. 
[EBUSY] mutex is already locked. 
[EINVAL] mutex is invalid. 
[EDEADLK] calling thread already owns mutex. 
Hint: Always unlock within the same thread. 
I pthread_mutex_unlock 
int pthread_mutex_unlock ( 
pthread_mutex_t *mutex); 
Unlock a mutex. The mutex becomes unowned. If any threads are waiting for the 
mutex, one is awakened (scheduling policy sched_fifo and sched_rr policy wait- 
ers are chosen in priority order, then any others are chosen in unspecified order). 
References: 3.2, 5.2.1 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [EINVAL] mutex is invalid. 
[EPERM] calling thread does not own mutex. 
Hint: Always unlock within the same thread. 
9.3.5 Condition variables 
Condition variables provide communication, the ability to wait for some shared 
resource to reach some desired state, or to signal that it has reached some state 
in which another thread may be interested. Each condition variable is closely 
associated with a mutex that protects the state of the resource. 
I pthread_condaftr_destroy 
int pthread_condattr_destroy ( 
pthread_condattr_t *attr); 
Destroy a condition variable attributes object. The object can no longer be used. 
References: 3.3, 5.2.2 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [EINVAL] attr invalid. 
Hint: Does not affect condition variables created using attr. 
320 
CHAPTER 9 POSIX threads mini-reference 
pthread_condattr_getpshared [_posix_thread_process_shared] 
int pthread_condattr_getpshared ( 
const pthread_condattr_t *attr, 
int *pshared); 
Determine whether condition variables created with attr can be shared by multiple 
processes. 
PTHREAD_ 
PTHREAD_ 
PROCESS 
PROCESS 
SHARED 
PRIVATE 
pshared 
May be shared if in shared 
memory. 
Cannot be shared. 
References: 
Headers: 
Errors: 
Hint: 
3.3, 5.2.2 
<pthread.h> 
[EINVAL] attr invalid. 
pshared condition variables must be allocated in shared memory 
and used with pshared mutexes. 
I pthread_condattr_init 
int pthread_condattr_init ( 
pthread_condattr_t 
*attr); 
Initialize a condition variable attributes object with default attributes. 
References: 3.3, 5.2.2 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [ENOMEM] insufficient memory for attr. 
Hint: Use to define condition variable types. 
pthread_condattr_setpshared [_posix_thread_process_shared] 
int pthread_condattr_setpshared ( 
pthread_condattr_t *attr, 
int pshared); 
Condition variables created with attr can be shared between processes if the 
pthread_cond_t variable is allocated in memory shared by the processes. 
PTHREAD 
PTHREAD_ 
PROCESS 
PROCESS 
SHARED 
PRIVATE 
pshared 
May be shared if in shared 
memory. 
Cannot be shared. 
POSIX 1003.1c-1995 interfaces 321 
References: 3.3, 5.2.2 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [EINVAL] attr or detachstate invalid. 
Hint: pshared condition variables must be allocated in shared memory 
and used with pshared mutexes. 
pthread_cond_destroy 
int pthread_cond_destroy ( 
pthread_cond_t *cond); 
Destroy condition variable cond that you no longer need. 
References: 3.3, 5.2.2 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [EBUSY] cond is in use. 
[EINVAL] cond is invalid. 
Hint: Safest after wakeup from cond, when no other threads will wait. 
pthread_cond_init 
int pthread_cond_init ( 
pthread_cond_t *cond, 
const pthread_condattr_t *attr); 
Initialize a condition variable cond. The attr argument specifies optional creation 
attributes. 
References: 3.3, 5.2.2 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [EAGAIN] insufficient resources (other than memory). 
[ ENOMEM] insufficient memory. 
[ ebusy ] cond is already initialized. 
[EINVAL] attr is invalid. 
Hint: Use static initialization instead, if possible. 
I pthread_cond_broadcast 
int pthread_cond_broadcast ( 
pthread_cond_t *cond); 
Broadcast condition variable cond, waking all current waiters. 
References: 3.3, 5.2.2 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [EINVAL] cond is invalid. 
Hint: Use when more than one waiter may respond to predicate change 
or if any waiting thread may not be able to respond. 
322 CHAPTER 9 POSIX threads mini-reference 
I pthread_cond_signal 
int pthread_cond_signal ( 
pthread_cond_t *cond); 
Signal condition variable cond, waking one waiting thread. If SCHED_fifo or sched_rr 
policy threads are waiting, the highest-priority waiter is awakened. Otherwise, an 
unspecified waiter is awakened. 
References: 3.3, 5.2.2 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [EINVAL] cond is invalid. 
Hint: Use when any waiter can respond, and only one need respond. (All 
waiters are equal.) 
I pthread_cond_timedwait 
int pthread_cond_timedwait ( 
pthread_cond_t *cond, 
pthread_mutex_t *mutex, 
const struct timespec *abstime); 
Wait on condition variable cond, until awakened by a signal or broadcast, or until 
the absolute time abstime is reached. 
References: 3.3, 5.2.2 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [ETIMEDOUT] time specified by abstime has passed. 
[EINVAL] cond, mutex, or abstime is invalid. 
[einval] different mutexes for concurrent waits. 
[EINVAL] mutex is not owned by calling thread. 
Hint: Mutex is always unlocked (before wait) and relocked (after wait) 
inside pthread_cond_timedwait, even if the wait fails, times out, or 
is canceled. 
I pthread_cond_vrait 
int pthread_cond_wait ( 
pthread_cond_t *cond, 
pthread_mutex_t *mutex); 
Wait on condition variable cond, until awakened by a signal or broadcast. 
References: 3.3, 5.2.2 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [EINVAL] cond or mutex is invalid. 
[EINVAL] different mutexes for concurrent waits. 
[EINVAL] mutex is not owned by calling thread. 
Hint: Mutex is always unlocked (before wait) and relocked (after wait) in- 
side pthread_cond_wait, even if the wait fails or is canceled. 
POSIX 1003.1 c-1995 interfaces 323 
9.3.6 Cancellation 
Cancellation provides a way to request that a thread terminate "gracefully" 
when you no longer need it to complete its normal execution. Each thread can 
control how and whether cancellation affects it, and can repair the shared state 
as it terminates due to cancellation. 
I pthread_cancel 
int pthread_cancel ( 
pthread_t thread); 
Requests that thread be canceled. 
References: 5.3 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [ESRCH] no thread found corresponding to thread. 
Hint: Cancellation is asynchronous. Use pthread_join to wait for termi- 
nation of thread if necessary. 
I pthread_cleanup_pop 
void pthread_cleanup_pop (int execute); 
Pop the most recently pushed cleanup handler. Invoke the cleanup handler if exe- 
cute is nonzero. 
References: 5.3 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Hint: Specify execute as nonzero to avoid duplication of common cleanup 
code. 
I pthread_cleanup_push 
void pthread_cleanup_push ( 
void ("routine)(void *), 
void *arg); 
Push a new cleanup handler onto the thread's stack of cleanup handlers. Invoke 
the cleanup handler if execute is nonzero. Each cleanup handler pushed onto the 
stack is popped and invoked with the argument arg when the thread exits by call- 
ing pthread_exit, when the thread acts on a cancellation request, or when the 
thread calls pthread_cleanup_pop with a nonzero execute argument. 
References: 5.3 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Hint: pthread_cleanup_push and pthread_cleanup_pop must be paired 
in the same lexical scope. 
324 
CHAPTER 9 POSIX threads mini-reference 
I pthread_setcancelstate 
int pthread_setcancelstate ( 
int state, 
int *oldstate); 
Atomically set the calling thread's cancelability state to state and return the pre- 
vious cancelability state at the location referenced by oldstate. 
PTHREAD 
PTHREAD_ 
CANCEL 
_CANCEL_ 
ENABLE 
DISABLE 
state, oldstate 
Cancellation is enabled. 
Cancellation is disabled. 
References: 5.3 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [EINVAL] state is invalid. 
Hint: Use to disable cancellation around "atomic" code that includes can- 
cellation points. 
I pthread_setcanceltype 
int pthread_setcanceltype ( 
int type, 
int *oldtype); 
Atomically set the calling thread's cancelability type to type and return the previ- 
ous cancelability type at the location referenced by oldtype. 
PTHREAD CANCEL DEFERRED 
type, oldtype 
Only deferred caiic.ellal.ion is 
allowed. 
pthread_cancel_asynchronous Asynchronous cancellation is 
allowed. 
References: 5.3 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [einval] type is invalid. 
Hint: Use with caution！most code is not safe for use with asynchronous 
cancelability type. 
POSIX 1003.1 c-1995 interfaces 325 
I pthreadjestcancel 
void pthread_testcancel (void); 
Creates a deferred cancellation point in the calling thread. The call has no effect if 
the current cancelability state is pthread_cancel_DISABLE. 
References: 5.3 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Hint: Cancellation is asynchronous. Use pthread_join to wait for termi- 
nation of thread if necessary. 
9.3.7 Thread-specific data 
Thread-specific data provides a way to declare variables that have a common 
"name" in all threads, but a unique value in each thread. You should consider 
using thread-specific data in a threaded program in many cases where a non- 
threaded program would use "static" data. When the static data maintains con- 
text across a series of calls to some function, for example, the context should 
generally be thread-specific. (If not, the static data must be protected by a 
mutex.) 
I pthread_getspecific 
void *pthread_getspecific ( 
pthread_key_t key); 
Return the current value of key in the calling thread. If no value has been set for 
key in the thread, null is returned. 
References: 5.4, 7.2, 7.3.1 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: The effect of calling pthread_getspecif ic with an invalid key is un- 
defined. No errors are detected. 
Hint: Calling pthread_getspecif ic in a destructor function will return 
null. Use destructor's argument instead. 
pthread_key_create 
int pthread_key_create ( 
pthread_key_t *key, 
void (*destructor)(void *)); 
Create a thread-specific data key visible to all threads. All existing and new threads 
have value null for key until set using pthread_setspecif ic. When any thread 
with a non-NULL value for key terminates, destructor is called with key's current 
value for that thread. 
326 CHAPTER 9 POSLK threads mini-reference 
References: 5.4,7.2,7.3.1 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [EAGAIN] insufficient resources or PTHREAD_keys_MAX exceeded. 
[enomem] insufficient memory to create the key. 
Hint: Each key (pthread_key_t variable) must be created only once; use 
a mutex or pthread_once. 
I pthread_key_delete 
int pthread_key_delete ( 
pthread_key_t key); 
Delete a thread-specific data key. This does not change the value of the thread- 
specific data key for any thread and does not run the key's destructor in any thread, 
so it should be used with great caution. 
References: 5.4 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [Einval] key is invalid. 
Hint: Use only when you know all threads have null value. 
pthread.setspecific 
int pthread_setspecific ( 
pthread_key_t key, 
const void *value); 
Associate a thread-specific value within the calling thread for the specified key. 
References: 5.4, 7.2, 7.3.1 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [enomem] insufficient memory. 
[EINVAL] key is invalid. 
Hint: If you set a value of null, the key's destructor will not be called at 
thread termination. 
9.3.8 Realtime scheduling 
Realtime scheduling provides a predictable response time to important events 
within the process. Note that "predictable" does not always mean "fast," and in 
many cases realtime scheduling may impose overhead that results in slower exe- 
cution. Realtime scheduling is also subject to synchronization problems such as 
priority inversion (Sections 5.5.4 and 8.1.4), although Pthreads provides optional 
facilities to address some of these problems. 
POSLK 1003. lc-1995 interfaces 327 
pthread_attr_getinheritsched [_posix_thread_priority_scheduling] 
int pthread_attr_getinheritsched ( 
const pthread_attr_t *attr, 
int *inheritsched); 
Determine whether threads created with attr will run using the scheduling policy 
and parameters of the creator or those specified in the attributes object. The default 
inheritsched is implementation-defined. 
inheritsched 
pthread_inherit_sched Use creator's scheduling 
policy and parameters. 
pthread_explicit_sched Use scheduling policy and 
parameters in attributes 
object. 
References: 5.2.3, 5.5 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [ENOSYS] priority scheduling is not supported. 
[EINVAL] attr invalid. 
pthread_attr_getschedparam [_posix_thread_priority_scheduling] 
int pthread_attr_getschedparam ( 
const pthread_attr_t *attr, 
struct sched_param *param); 
Determine the scheduling parameters used by threads created with attr. The default 
param is implementation defined. 
References: 5.2.3, 5.5 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [ENOSYS] priority scheduling is not supported. 
[EINVAL] attr invalid. 
pthread_attr_getschedpolicy [_posix_thread_priority_scheduling] 
int pthread_attr_getschedpolicy ( 
const pthread_attr_t *attr, 
int *policy); 
Determine the scheduling policy used by threads created with attr. The default 
policy is implementation defined. 
328 
CHAPTER 9 POSIX threads mini-reference 
SCHED FIFO 
SCHED RR 
SCHED OTHER 
policy 
Run thread until it blocks; 
preempt lower-priority 
threads when ready. 
Like SCHED_FIFO, but sub- 
ject to periodic timeslicing. 
Implementation defined (may 
be SCHED_FIFO, SCHED_RR, 
or something else). 
References: 5.2.3, 5.5 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [ENOSYS] priority scheduling is not supported. 
[EINVAL] attr invalid. 
pthread_attr_getscope [_posix_thread_priority_scheduling] 
int pthread_attr_getscope ( 
const pthread_attr_t *attr, 
int *contentionscope); 
Determine the contention scope used by threads created with attr. The default is 
implementation defined. 
contentionscope 
PTHREAD SCOPE PROCESS 
Thread contends with other 
threads in the process for pro- 
cessor resources. 
PTHREAD SCOPE SYSTEM 
Thread contends with threads 
in all processes for processor 
resources. 
References: 5.2.3, 5.5 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [ENOSYS] priority scheduling is not supported. 
[EINVAL] attr invalid. 
Hint: Implementation must support one or both of these, but need not 
support both. 
POSIX 1003.1 c-1995 interfaces 329 
pthread_attr_setinheritsched [_posix_thread_priority_scheduling] 
int pthread_attr_setinheritsched ( 
pthread__attr_t *attr, 
int inheritsched); 
Specify whether threads created with attr will run using the scheduling policy and 
parameters of the creator or those specified in the attributes object. When you 
change the scheduling policy or parameters in a thread attributes object, you must 
change the inheritsched attribute from pthread_inherit_sched to pthread_ 
explicit_SCHED. The default is implementation-defined. 
inheritsched 
pthread_INHERIT_SCHED Use creator's scheduling 
policy and parameters. 
pthread_explicit_SCHED Use scheduling policy and 
parameters in attributes 
object. 
References: 5.2.3, 5.5 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [ENOSYS] priority scheduling is not supported. 
[EINVAL] attr or inheritsched invalid. 
pthread_attr_setschedparam [_posix_thread_priority_scheduling] 
int pthread_attr_setschedparam ( 
pthread_attr_t *attr, 
const struct sched_param *param); 
Specify the scheduling parameters used by threads created with attr. The default 
param is implementation defined. 
References: 5.2.3, 5.5 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [ENOSYS] priority scheduling is not supported. 
[EINVAL] attr or param invalid. 
[ ENOTSUP ] param set to supported value. 
pthread_attr_setschedpolicy [_posix_thread_priority_scheduling] 
int pthread_attr_setschedpolicy ( 
pthread_attr_t *attr, 
int policy); 
Specify the scheduling policy used by threads created with attr. The default 
policy is implementation defined. 
330 
CHAPTER 9 POSIX threads mini-reference 
SCHED FIFO 
SCHED_RR 
SCHED OTHER 
policy 
Run thread until it blocks; 
preempt lower-priority 
threads when ready. 
Like SCHED_FIFO, but sub- 
ject to periodic timeslicing. 
Implementation denned (may 
be SCHED_FIFO, SCHED_RR, 
or something else). 
References: 5.2.3, 5.5 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [enosysj priority scheduling is not supported. 
[EINVAL] attr or policy invalid. 
[ENOTSUP] param set to supported value. 
pthread_attr_setscope [_posix_thread_priority_scheduling] 
int pthread_attr_setscope ( 
pthread_attr_t *attr, 
int contentionscope); 
Specify the contention scope used by threads created with attr. The default is 
implementation denned. 
contentionscope 
PTHREAD SCOPE PROCESS 
Thread contends with other 
threads in the process for pro- 
cessor resources. 
PTHREAD SCOPE SYSTEM 
Thread contends with threads 
in all processes for processor 
resources. 
References: 5.2.3, 5.5 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [ENOSYS] priority scheduling is not supported. 
[EINVAL] attr or contentionscope invalid. 
[ENOTSUP] contentionscope set to supported value. 
Hint: Implementation must support one or both of these, but need not 
support both. 
POSIX 1003.1c~ 1995 interfaces 
331 
pthread_getschedparam [_posix_thread_priority_scheduling] 
int pthread_getschedparam ( 
pthread_t thread, 
int *policy 
struct sched_param *param); 
Determine the scheduling policy and parameters (param) currently used by thread. 
policy 
SCHED FIFO 
SCHED_RR 
SCHED OTHER 
Run thread until it blocks; 
preempt lower-priority 
threads when ready. 
Like SCHED_FIFO, but sub- 
ject to periodic timeslicing. 
Implementation denned (may 
be SCHED_FIFO, SCHED_RR, 
or something else). 
References: 5.2.3, 5.5 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [ENOSYS] priority scheduling is not supported. 
[ESRCH] thread does not refer to an existing thread. 
Hint: Try to avoid dynamically modifying thread scheduling policy and 
parameters, if possible. 
pthread_mutex_getprioceiling [_posix_thread_prio_protect] 
int pthread_rautex_getprioceiling ( 
const pthread_mutex_t *mutex, 
int *prioceiling); 
Determine the priority ceiling at which threads will run while owning mutex. 
References: 3.2,5.2.1,5.5.5 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [ENOSYS] priority scheduling is not supported. 
[EINVAL] mutex invalid. 
Hint: Protect protocol is inappropriate unless the creator of the mutex 
also creates and controls all threads that might lock the mutex. 
332 CHAPTER 9 POSIX threads mini-reference 
pthread_mutex_setprioceiling [_posix_thread_prio_protect] 
int pthread_mutex_getprioceiling ( 
pthread_mutex_t *mutex, 
int prioceiling, 
int *old_ceiling); 
Specify the priority ceiling at which threads will run while owning mutex. Returns 
previous priority ceiling for mutex. 
References: 3.2,5.2.1,5.5.5 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [ENOSYS] priority scheduling is not supported. 
[EINVAL] mutex invalid, or prioceiling out of range. 
[EPERM] no privilege to set prioceiling. 
Hint: Protect protocol is inappropriate unless the creator of the mutex 
also creates and controls all threads that might lock the mutex. 
pthread_mutexaftr_getprioceiling [_posix_thread_prio_protect ] 
int pthread_mutexattr_getprioceiling ( 
const pthread_mutexattr_t *attr, 
int *prioceiling); 
Determine the priority ceiling at which threads will run while owning a mutex cre- 
ated with attr. 
References: 3.2, 5.2.1, 5.5.5 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [ENOSYS] priority scheduling is not supported. 
[EINVAL] attr invalid. 
Hint: Protect protocol is inappropriate unless the creator of the mutex 
also creates and controls all threads that might lock the mutex. 
pthread_mutexattr_getprotocol... [_posix_thread_prio_inherit_posix_thread_prio_protect] 
int pthread_mutexattr_getprotocol ( 
const pthread_mutexattr_t *attr, 
int *protocol); 
Determine whether mutexes created with attr have priority ceiling protocol (pro- 
tect), priority inheritance protocol {inherit), or no priority protocol (none). 
POSIX 1003.1 c-1995 interfaces 333 
protocol 
PTHREAD_PRIO_HONE No priority inheritance 
protocol. 
pthread_PRIO_INHERit While owning mutex, thread 
inherits highest priority of any 
thread waiting for the mutex. 
pthread_prio_protect While owning mutex, thread 
inherits mutex priority ceiling. 
References: 3.2,5.2.1,5.5.5 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [ENOSYS] priority scheduling is not supported. 
[EINVAL] attr invalid. 
Hint: Inherit protocol is expensive, and protect protocol is inappropriate 
unless the creator of the mutex also creates and controls all threads 
that might lock the mutex. 
pthread_mutexattr_setprioceiling [_posix_thread_prio_protect] 
int pthread_mutexattr_setprioceiling ( 
pthread_mutexattr_t *attr, 
int prioceiling); 
Specify the priority ceiling at which threads will run while owning a mutex created 
with attr. The value of prioceiling must be a valid priority parameter for the 
SCHED_FIFO policy. 
References: 3.2,5.2.1,5.5.5 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [ENOSYS] priority scheduling is not supported. 
[EINVAL] attr or prioceiling invalid. 
[EPERM] no permission to set prioceiling. 
Hint: Protect protocol is inappropriate unless the creator of the mutex 
also creates and controls all threads that might lock the mutex. 
pthread_mutexattr_setprotocol.... (_posix_thread_prio_inherit_posix_thread_prio_protect] 
int pthread_mutexattr_setprotocol ( 
pthread_mutexattr_t *attr, 
int protocol); 
Specify whether mutexes created with attr have priority ceiling protocol {protect), 
priority inheritance protocol (inherit), or no priority protocol (none). 
334 
CHAPTER 9 POSIX threads mini-reference 
PTHREAD_PRIO_NONE 
PTHREAD_PRIO_IKHERIT 
PTHREAD PRIO PROTECT 
protocol 
No priority inheritance 
protocol. 
While owning mutcx, thread 
inherits highest priority or any 
thread waiting for the mutex. 
While owning mutex, thread 
inherits mutex priority ceiling. 
References: 3.2, 5.2.1, 5.5.5 
Headers: <pthread.h> 
Errors: [ENOSYS] priority scheduling is not supported. 
[EINVAL] attr or protocol invalid. 
[ENOTSUP] protocol value is not supported. 
Hint: Inherit protocol is expensive, and protect protocol is inappropriate 
unless the creator of the mutex also creates and controls all threads 
that might lock the mutex. 
pthread_setschedparam [_posix_thread_priority_scheduling] 
int pthread_setschedparam ( 
pthread_t thread, 
int policy 
const struct sched_param *param); 
Specify the scheduling policy and parameters (param) to be used by thread. 
SCHED_FIFO 
SCHED_RR 
SCHED_OTHER 
policy 
Run thread until it blocks; 
preempt lower-priority 
threads when ready. 
Like SCHED_FIFO, but sub- 
ject to periodic timeslicing. 
Implementation defined (may 
be SCHED_FIFO, SCHED_RR, 
or something else). 
References: 
Headers: 
Errors: 
Hint: 
5.5 
<pthread.h> 
[ENOSYS] priority scheduling is not supported. 
[ESRCH] thread does not refer to an existing thread. 
[EINVAL] policy or param is invalid. 
[ENOTSUP] policy or param is unsupported value. 
[EPERM] no permission to set policy or param. 
Try to avoid dynamically modifying thread scheduling policy and 
parameters, if possible. 
POSIX 1003.1C-1995 interfaces 
335 
sched_get_priority_max [_posix_priority_scheduling] 
int sched_get_priority_max ( 
int policy); 
Return the maximum integer priority allowed for the specified scheduling policy. 
policy 
SCHED_FIFO 
SCHED_RR 
SCHED OTHER 
Run thread until it blocks; 
preempt lower-priority 
threads when ready. 
Like sched_fifo, but subject 
to periodic timeslicing. 
Implementation defined (may 
be SCHED_FIFO, SCHED_RR, 
or something else). 
References: 5.5.2 
Headers: <sched.h> 
Errors: [ENOSYS] priority scheduling is not supported. 
[EINVAL] policy is invalid. 
Hint: Priority min and max are integer values！you can compute relative 
values, for example, half and quarter points in range. 
sched_get_priority_min [posixpriorityscheduling] 
int sched_get_priority_min ( 
int policy); 
Return the minimum integer priority allowed for the specified scheduling policy. 
policy 
SCHED FIFO 
SCHED RR 
Run thread until it blocks; 
preempt lower-priority 
threads when ready. 
SCHED OTHER 
Like SCHED_FIFO, but sub- 
ject to periodic timeslicing. 
Implementation denned (may 
be SCHED_FIFO, SCHED_RR, 
or something else). 
References: 5.5.2 
Headers: <sched.h> 
Errors: [ENOSYS] priority scheduling is not supported. 
[EINVAL] policy is invalid. 
Hint: Priority min and max are integer values！you can compute relative 
values, for example, half and quarter points in range. 
336 CHAPTER 9 POSIX threads mini-reference 
9.3.9 Fork handlers 
Pthreads provides some new functions to help the new threaded environment 
to coexist with the traditional process-based UNIX environment. Creation of a 
child process by copying the full address space, for example, causes problems for 
threaded applications because the fork call is asynchronous with respect to 
other threads in the process. 
I pthread_atfork 
int pthread_atfork ( 
void (*prepare)(void), 
void (*parent)(void), 
void (*child)(void)); 
Define "fork handlers" that are run when the process creates a child process. Allows 
protection of synchronization objects and shared data in the child process (which 
is otherwise difficult to control). 
References: 6.1.1 
Headers: <unistd.h> 
Errors: [ENOMEM] insufficient space to record the handlers. 
Hint: All resources needed by child must be protected. 
9.3.10 Stdio 
Pthreads provides some new functions, and new versions of old functions, to 
access ANSI C stdio features safely from a threaded process. For safety reasons, 
the old forms of single-character access to stdio buffers have been altered to lock 
the file stream, which can decrease performance. You can change old code to 
instead lock the file stream manually and, within that locked region, use new 
character access operations that do not lock the file stream. 
| flockfile 
void flockfile ( 
FILE *file); 
Increase the lock count for a stdio file stream to gain exclusive access to the file 
stream. If the file stream is currently locked by another thread, the calling thread 
is blocked until the lock count for the file stream becomes zero. If the calling thread 
already owns the file stream lock, the lock count is incremented！an identical num- 
ber of calls to funlockfile is required to release the file stream lock. 
* Digital UNIX and Solaris both (incorrectly) place the definition in <pthread. h>. The UNIX 98 
brand will require that they be fixed. 
POSIX 1003.1 c-1995 interfaces 337 
Although most stdio functions, such as printf and f gets, are thread-safe, you 
may sometimes find that it is important that a sequence of printf calls, for exam- 
ple, from one thread cannot be separated by calls made from another thread. Also, 
a few stdio functions are not thread-safe and can only be used while the file stream 
is locked by the caller. 
References: 6.4.1 
Headers: <stdio.h> 
Hint: Use to protect a sequence of stdio operations. 
j ftrylockfile 
int ftrylockfile ( 
FILE *file); 
If the file stream is currently locked by another thread, return a nonzero value. Oth- 
erwise, increase the lock count for the file stream, and return the value zero. 
References: 6.4.1 
Headers: <stdio.h> 
Hint: Use to protect a sequence of stdio operations. 
I funlockfile 
void funlockfile ( 
FILE *file); 
Decrease the lock count for a stdio file stream that was previously locked by a cor- 
responding call to funlockfile. If the lock count becomes 0, release the lock so 
that another thread can lock it. 
References: 6.4.1 
Headers: <stdio.h> 
Hint: Use to protect a sequence of stdio operations. 
I getc_unlocked 
int getc_unlocked ( 
FILE *file); 
Return a single character from the stdio stream file, without locking the file stream. 
This operation must only be used while the file stream has been locked by calling 
f lockf ile, or when you know that no other thread may access the file stream con- 
currently. Returns EOF for read errors or end-of-file condition. 
References: 6.4.2 
Headers: <stdio.h> 
Hint: Replace old calls to getc to retain fastest access. 
338 CHAPTER 9 POSIX threads mini-reference 
getchar_unlocked 
int getc_unlocked (void); 
Return a single character from the stdio stream stdin without locking the file 
stream. This operation must only be used while the file stream has been locked by 
calling f lockf ile, or when you know that no other thread may access the file 
stream concurrently. Returns EOF for read errors or end-of-flle condition. 
References: 6.4.2 
Headers: <stdio.h> 
Hint: Replace old calls to getchar to retain fastest access. 
putc_unlocked 
int putc_unlocked ( 
int c, 
FILE *file); 
Write a single character c (interpreted as an unsigned char) to the stdio stream file 
without locking the file stream. This operation must only be used while the file 
stream has been locked by calling f lockf ile, or when you know that no other 
thread may access the file stream concurrently. Returns the character or the value 
EOF if an error occurred. 
References: 6.4.2 
Headers: <stdio.h> 
Hint: Replace old calls to putc to retain fastest access. 
I putchar_unlocked 
int putchar_unlocked ( 
int c); 
Write a single character c (interpreted as an unsigned char) to the stdio stream 
stdout without locking the file stream. This operation must only be used while the 
file stream has been locked by calling f lockf ile, or when you know that no other 
thread may access the file stream concurrently. Returns the character or the value 
EOF if an error occurred. 
References: 6.4.2 
Headers: <stdio.h> 
Hint: Replace old calls to putchar to retain fastest access. 
9.3.11 Thread-safe functions 
Thread-safe functions provide improved access to traditional features of 
ANSI C and POSIX that cannot be effectively made thread-safe without interface 
changes. These routines are designated by the "_r" suffix added to the traditional 
function name they replace, for example, getlogin_r for getlogin. 
POSIX 1003.1 c-1995 interfaces 339 
I getlogirw 
int getlogin_r ( 
char *name, 
size_t namesize); 
Write the user name associated with the current process into the buffer pointed to 
by name. The buffer is namesize bytes long, and should have space for the name 
and a terminating null character. The maximum size of the login name is LOGIN_ 
NAME_MAX. 
References: 6.5.1 
Headers: <unistd.h> 
I readdir_r 
int readdir_r ( 
DIR *dirp, 
struct dirent *entry, 
struct dirent **result); 
Return a pointer (result) to the directory entry at the current position in the direc- 
tory stream to which dirp refers. Whereas readdir retains the current position us- 
ing a static variable, readdir_r uses the entry parameter, supplied by the caller. 
References: 6.5.2 
Headers: <sys/types.h>, <dirent.h> 
Errors: [EBADF] dirp is not an open directory stream. 
r 
strtokj 
char *strtok_r ( 
char *s, 
const char *sep, 
char **lasts); 
Return a pointer to the next token in the string s. Whereas strtok retains the current 
position within a string using a static variable, strtok_r uses the lasts parameter, 
supplied by the caller. 
References: 6.5.3 
Headers: <string.h> 
asctime_r 
char *asctime_r ( 
const struct tm*tm, 
char *buf); 
Convert the "broken-down" time in the structure pointed to by tm into a string, 
which is stored in the buffer pointed to by buf. The buffer pointed to by buf must 
340 CHAPTER 9 POS1X threads mini-reference 
contain at least 26 bytes. The function returns a pointer to the buffer on success, 
or null on failure. 
References: 6.5.4 
Headers: <time.h> 
ctime_r 
char *ctime_r ( 
const time_t *clock, 
char *buf); 
Convert the calendar time pointed to by clock into a string representing the local 
time, which is stored in the buffer pointed to by buf. The buffer pointed to by buf 
must contain at least 26 bytes. The function returns a pointer to the buffer on suc- 
cess, or NULL on failure. 
References: 6.5.4 
Headers: < t ime.h> 
I gmtime_r 
struct tm *gmtime_r ( 
const time_t *clock, 
struct tm *result); 
Convert the calendar time pointed to by clock into a "broken-down time" expressed 
as Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), which is stored in the structure pointed to 
by result. The function returns a pointer to the structure on success, or null on 
failure. 
References: 6.5.4 
Headers: <time.h> 
I localtime_r 
struct tm *localtime_r ( 
const time_t *clock, 
struct tm *result); 
Convert the calendar time pointed to by clock into a "broken-down time" expressed 
as local time, which is stored in the structure pointed to by result. The function 
returns a pointer to the structure on success, or null on failure. 
References: 6.5.4 
Headers: <time.h> 
POSIX 1003.1 c-1995 interfaces 341 
rand_r 
int rand_r ( 
unsigned int *seed); 
Return the next value in a sequence of pseudorandom integers in the range of 0 to 
rand_max. Whereas rand uses a static variable to maintain the context between a 
series of calls, rand_r uses the value pointed to by seed, which is supplied by the 
caller. 
References: 6.5.5 
Headers: <stdlib.h> 
I getgrgicU 
int getgrgid_r ( 
gid_t 
struct group *group, 
char *buffer, 
size_t bufsize, 
struct group **result); 
Locate an entry from the group database with a group id matching the gid argu- 
ment. The group entry is stored in the memory pointed to by buffer, which con- 
tains bufsize bytes, and a pointer to the entry is stored at the address pointed to 
by result. The maximum buffer size required can be determined by calling 
sysconf with the _SC_GETGR_R_SIZE_MAX parameter. 
References: 6.5.6 
Headers: <sys/types.h>, <grp.h> 
Errors: [ erange ] the specified buffer is too small. 
getgrnam_r 
int getgrnam_r ( 
const char *name, 
struct group *group, 
char *buffer, 
size_t bufsize, 
struct group **result); 
Locate an entry from the group database with a group name matching the name 
argument. The group entry is stored in the memory pointed to by buffer, which 
contains bufsize bytes, and a pointer to the entry is stored at the address pointed 
to by result. The maximum buffer size required can be determined by calling 
sysconf with the _sc_getgr_r_size_max parameter. 
References: 6.5.6 
Headers: <sys/types.h>, <grp.h> 
Errors: [ erange ] the specified buffer is too small. 
342 CHAPTER 9 POSIX threads mini-reference 
I getpwuid_r 
int getpwuid_r ( 
uid_t uid, 
struct passwd *pwd, 
char *buffer, 
size_t bufsize, 
struct passwd **result); 
Locate an entry from the user database with a user id matching the uid argument. 
The user entry is stored in the memory pointed to by buffer, which contains 
bufsize bytes, and a pointer to the entry is stored at the address pointed to by 
result. The maximum buffer size required can be determined by calling sysconf 
with the _sc_getpw_r_size_max parameter. 
References: 6.5.6 
Headers: <sys/types.h>, <pwd.h> 
Errors: [ERANGE ] the specified buffer is too small. 
I getpwnam_r 
int getpwnam_r ( 
const char *name, 
struct passwd *pwd, 
char *buffer, 
size_t bufsize, 
struct passwd **result); 
Locate an entry from the user database with a user name matching the name argu- 
ment. The user entry is stored in the memory pointed to by buff er, which contains 
bufsize bytes, and a pointer to the entry is stored at the address pointed to by 
result. The maximum buffer size required can be determined by calling sysconf 
with the _SC_GETPW_r_size_MAX parameter. 
References: 6.5.6 
Headers: <sys/types.h>, <pwd.h> 
Errors: [ERANGE ] the specified buffer is too small. 
9.3.12 Signals 
Pthreads provides functions that extend the POSIX signal model to support 
multithreaded processes. All threads in a process share the same signal actions. 
Each thread has its own pending and blocked signal masks. The process also 
has a pending signal mask so that asynchronous signals can pend against the 
process when all threads have the signal blocked. In a multithreaded process, 
the behavior of sigprocmask is undefined. 
POSIX 1003.1c-1995 interfaces 
343 
| pthreacLkill 
int pthread_kill ( 
pthread t 
int 
thread, 
sig); 
Request that the signal sig be delivered to thread. If sig is 0, no signal is sent, but 
error checking Is performed. If the action of the signal is to terminate, stop, or con- 
tinue, then the entire process is affected. 
References: 6.6.3 
Headers: <signal.h> 
Errors: [ESRCH] no thread corresponding to thread. 
[EINVAL] sig is an invalid signal number. 
Hint: To terminate a thread, use cancellation. 
I pthread_sigmask 
int pthread_sigmask ( 
int how, 
const sigset_t *set, 
sigset_t *oset); 
Control the masking of signals within the calling thread. 
how 
SIG BLOCK 
SIG UNBLOCK 
SIG SETMASK 
Resulting sot is Ihe union ol the 
cum'iil si-i and ihc iirftiuiiciii set. 
Resulting set is ihc intersection of 
llii* rurreni sel ;ind tin: argument 
set. 
Resulting set is the set pointed in 
by the argument set. 
References: 6.6.2 
Headers: <signal.h> 
Errors: [einval] how is not one of the defined values. 
Hint: You cannot prevent delivery of asynchronous signals to the process 
unless the signal is blocked in all threads. 
I sigtimedwait 
int sigtimedwait ( 
const sigset_t *set, 
siginfo_t *info, 
const struct timespec *timeout); 
If a signal in set is pending, atomically clear it from the set of pending signals and 
return the signal number in the si_signo member of info. The cause of the signal 
344 CHAPTER 9 POSIX threads mini-reference 
shall be stored in the si_code member. If any value is queued to the selected signal, 
return the first queued value in the si_value member. If no signal in set is pend- 
ing, suspend the calling thread until one or more become pending. If the time in- 
terval specified by timeout passes, sigtimedwait will return with the error eagain. 
This function returns the signal number！on error, it returns -1 and sets err no to 
the appropriate error code. 
References: 6.6.4 
Headers: <signal.h> 
Errors: [EINVAL] set contains an invalid signal number. 
[eagain] the timeout interval passed. 
[enosyS] realtime signals are not supported. 
Hint: Use only for asynchronous signal delivery. All signals in set must 
be masked in the calling thread, and should usually be masked in 
all threads. 
sigwait 
int sigwait ( 
const sigset_t *set, 
int *sig); 
If a signal in set is pending, atomically clear it from the set of pending signals and 
return the signal number in the location referenced by sig. If no signal in set is 
pending, suspend the calling thread until one or more become pending. 
References: 6.6.4 
Headers: <signal.h> 
Errors: [EINVAL] set contains an invalid signal number. 
Hint: Use only for asynchronous signal delivery. All signals in set must 
be masked in the calling thread, and should usually be masked in 
all threads. 
I sigwaitinfo 
int sigwaitinfo ( 
const sigset_t *set, 
siginfo_t *info); 
If a signal in set is pending, atomically clear it from the set of pending signals and 
return the signal number in the si_signo member of info. The cause of the signal 
shall be stored in the si_code member. If any value is queued to the selected signal, 
return the first queued value in the si_value member. If no signal in set is pend- 
ing, suspend the calling thread until one or more become pending. This function re- 
turns the signal number！on error, it returns -1 and sets err no to the appropriate 
error code. 
POSIX 1003.lc-1995 interfaces 345 
References: 6.6.4 
Headers: <signal.h> 
Errors: [einval] set contains an invalid signal number. 
[ENOSYS] realtime signals are not supported. 
Hint: Use only for asynchronous signal delivery. All signals in set must 
be masked in the calling thread, and should usually be masked in 
all threads. 
9.3.13 Semaphores 
Semaphores come from POSIX. lb (POSIX 1003.1b-1993) rather than from 
Pthreads. They follow the older UNIX convention for reporting errors. That is, on 
failure they return a value of -1 and store the appropriate error number into 
errno. All of the semaphore functions require the header file <semaphore.h>. 
I sem_destroy [posixsemaphores] 
int sem_destroy ( 
sem_t *sem); 
Destroy an unnamed semaphore. 
References: 6.6.6 
Headers: <semaphore.h> 
Errors: [einval] value exceeds SEM_value_max. 
[ENOSYS] semaphores are not supported. 
[ ebusy ] threads (or processes) are currently blocked on sem. 
semjnit [posixsemaphores] 
int sem_init ( 
sem_t *sem, 
int pshared, 
unsigned int value); 
Initialize an unnamed semaphore. The initial value of the semaphore counter is 
value. If the pshared argument has a nonzero value, the semaphore can be shared 
between processes. With a zero value, it can be shared only between threads in the 
same process. 
References: 6.6.6 
Headers: < s emaphore.h> 
Errors: [EINVAL] sem is not a valid semaphore. 
[Enospc] a required resource has been exhausted. 
[ENOSYS] semaphores are not supported. 
[EPERM] the process lacks appropriate privilege. 
Hint: Use a value of 1 for a lock, a value of 0 for waiting. 
346 CHAPTER 9 POSIX threads mini-reference 
semjrywait [posixsemaphoresj 
int sem_trywait ( 
sem_t *sem); 
Try to wait on a semaphore (or "try to lock" the semaphore). If the semaphore value 
is greater than zero, decrease the value by one. If the semaphore value is 0, then 
return immediately with the error eagain. 
References: 6.6.6 
Headers: <semaphore.h> 
Errors: [eagain] the semaphore was already locked. 
[EINVAL] sem is not a valid semaphore. 
[EINTR] the function was interrupted by a signal. 
[enosys] semaphores are not supported. 
[EDEADLK] a deadlock condition was detected. 
Hint: When the semaphore's initial value was 1, this is a lock operation; 
when the initial value was 0, this is a wait operation. 
Sem_pOSt [_POSIX_SEMAPHORES] 
int sem_post ( 
sem_t *sem); 
Post a wakeup to a semaphore. If there are waiting threads (or processes), one is 
awakened. Otherwise the semaphore value is incremented by one. 
References: 6.6.6 
Headers: <semaphore.h> 
Errors: [EINVAL] sem is not a valid semaphore. 
[EMOSYS] semaphores are not supported. 
Hint: May be used from within a signal-handling function. 
sem_wait [_posix_semaphores] 
int sem_wait ( 
sem_t *sem); 
Wait on a semaphore (or lock the semaphore). If the semaphore value is greater 
than zero, decrease the value by one. If the semaphore value is 0, then the calling 
thread (or process) is blocked until it can successfully decrease the value or until 
interrupted by a signal. 
References: 6.6.6 
Headers: <semaphore.h> 
Errors: [EINVALJ sem is not a valid semaphore. 
[EINTR] the function was interrupted by a signal. 
[ENOSYS] semaphores are not supported. 
[ edeadlk ] a deadlock condition was detected. 
Hint: When the semaphore's initial value was 1, this is a lock operation; 
when the initial value was 0, this is a wait operation. 
10 Future standardization 
Three primary standardization efforts affect Pthreads programmers. X/Open's 
XSH5 is a new interface specification that includes POSIX. lb, Pthreads, and a set 
of additional thread functions (part of the Aspen fast-track submission). The 
POSIX. lj draft standard proposes to add barriers, read/write locks, spinlocks, 
and improved support for "relative time" waits on condition variables. The 
POSIX. 14 draft standard (a "POSIX Standard Profile") gives direction for manag- 
ing the various options of Pthreads in a multiprocessor environment. 
10.1 X/Open XSH5 (UNIX98) 
Mutex type attribute: 
int pthread_mutexattr_gettype ( 
const pthread_mutexattr_t *attr, int *type); 
int pthread_mutexattr_settype ( 
pthread_mutexattr_t *attr, int type); 
Read/write locks: 
int pthread_rwlock_init (pthread_rwlock_t *rwlock, 
const pthread_rwlockattr_t *attr); 
int pthread_rwlock_destroy (pthread_rwlock_t *rwlock); 
pthread_rwlock_t rwlock = PTHREAD_RWLOCK_INITIALIZER; 
int pthread_rwlock_rdlock (pthread_rwlock_t *rwlock); 
int pthread_rwlock_tryrdlock ( 
pthread_rwlock_t *rwlock); 
int pthread_rwlock_unlock (pthread_rwlock_t *rwlock); 
int pthread_rwlock_wrlock (pthread_rwlock_t *rwlock); 
int pthread_rwlock_trywrlock ( 
pthread_rwlock_t *rwlock); 
int pthread_rwlockattr_init ( 
pthread_rwlockattr_t *attr); 
int pthread_rwlockattr_destroy ( 
pthread_rwlockattr_t *attr); 
int pthread_rwlockattr_getpshared ( 
const pthread_rwlockattr_t *attr, int *pshared); 
int pthread_rwlockattr_setpshared ( 
pthread_rwlockattr_t *attr, int pshared); 
347 
348 CHAPTER 10 Future standardization 
Parallel I/O: 
size_t pread (int fildes, 
void *buf, size_t nbyte, off_t offset); 
size_t pwrite (int fildes, 
const void *buf, size_t nbyte, off_t offset); 
Miscellaneous: 
int pthread_attr_getguardsize ( 
const pthread_attr_t *attr, size_t *guardsize); 
int pthread_attr_setguardsize ( 
pthread_attr_t *attr, size_t guardsize); 
int pthread_getconcurrency (); 
int pthread_setconcurrency (int new_level); 
X/Open, which is part of The Open Group, owns the UNIX trademark and 
develops UNIX industry portability specifications and brands. The X/Open brands 
include XPG3, XPG4, UNIX93, and UNIX95. UNIX95 is also known as "SPEC 1170" 
or the "Single UNIX Specification." 
X/Open recently published the X/Open CAE Specification, System Interfaces 
and Headers, Issue 5 (also known as XSH5), which is part of the new UNIX98 
brand. XSH5 requires conformance to the POSIX. 1-1996 standard, which in- 
cludes the POSIX. lb and POSIX. lc amendments. The XSH5 specification also 
adds a set of extensions to POSIX. This section discusses the XSH5 extensions 
that specifically affect threaded programs. You can recognize a system conform- 
ing to XSH5 by a definition for the _XOPEN_VERSION symbol, in <unistd. h>, to the 
value 500 or higher. 
The most valuable contribution of UNIX98 to the threaded programming 
industry, however, is possibly the development of a standardized, portable testing 
system. A number of complicated issues arise when developing an implementa- 
tion of Pthreads, and some subtle aspects of the standard are ambiguous. Such 
an industry-wide testing system will require all vendors implementing UNIX98 
branded systems to agree on interpretations of Pthreads. 
10.1.1 POSIX options for XSH5 
Some of the features that are options in the Pthreads standard are required 
by XSH5. If your code relies on these Pthreads options, it will work on any sys- 
tem conforming to XSH5: 
? _posix_threads: Threads are supported. 
? _posix_thread_attr_stackaddr: The stackaddr attribute is supported. 
? _POSIX_THREAD_ATTR_STACKSIZE: The stacksize attribute is supported. 
? _posix_thread_process_SHARED: Mutexes, condition variables, and XSH5 
read/write locks can be shared between processes. 
X/OpenXSH5 [UNIX98] 
349 
? _posix_thread_safe_functions: The Pthreads thread-safe functions are 
supported. 
Several additional Pthreads options are "bundled" into the XSH5 realtime 
threads option group. If your system conforms to XSH5 and supports the _xopen_ 
realtime_threads option, then these Pthreads options are also supported: 
? _posix_thread_priority_scheduling: Realtime priority scheduling is 
supported. 
? _posix_thread_prio_protect: Priority ceiling mutexes are supported. 
? _posix_thread_prio_inherit: Priority inheritance mutexes are supported. 
10.1.2 Mutextype 
The DCE threads package provided an extension that allowed the program- 
mer to specify the "kind" of mutex to be created. DCE threads supplied fast, 
recursive, and nonrecursive mutex kinds. The XSH5 specification changes the 
attribute name from "kind" to "type," renames fast to default, renames nonrecur- 
sive to errorcheck, and adds a new type, normal (Table 10.1). 
A normal mutex is not allowed to detect deadlock errors！that is, a thread will 
hang if it tries to lock a normal mutex that it already owns. The default mutex 
type, like the DCE fast mutex,* provides implementation-defined error checking. 
That is, default may be mapped to one of the other standard types or may be 
something entirely different. 
Mutex type 
PTHREAD MUTEX NORMAL 
PTHREAD_MUTEX_RECURSIVE 
PTHREAD MUTEX ERRORCHECK 
PTHREAD_MUTEX_DEFAULT 
Definition 
Basic mutex with no specific error checking built 
in. Does not report a deadlock error. 
Allows any thread to lock the mutex "recursively" 
！it must unlock an equal number of times to 
release the mutex. 
Detects and reports simple usage errors！an 
attempt to unlock a mutex that's not locked by 
the calling thread (or that isn't locked at all), or an 
attempt to relock a mutex the thread already 
owns. 
The default mutex type, with very loose semantics 
to allow unfettered innovation and experimenta- 
tion. May be mapped to any of the other three de- 
fined types, or may be something else entirely. 
TABLE 10.1 XSH5 mutex types 
*DCE threads implemented fast mutexes much like the definition ofXSH5 normal mutexes, 
with no error checking. This was not, however, specification of intent. 
350 CHAPTER 10 Future standardization 
As an application developer, you can use any of the mutex types almost inter- 
changeably as long as your code does not depend on the implementation to detect 
(or fail to detect) any particular errors. Never write code that counts on an imple- 
mentation Jailing to detect any error. Do not lock a mutex in one thread and 
unlock it in another thread, for example, even if you are sure that the error won't 
be reported！use a semaphore instead, which has no "ownership" semantics. 
All mutexes, regardless of type, are created using pthread_mutex_init, de- 
stroyed using pthread_mutex_destroy, and manipulated using pthread_mutex_ 
lock, pthread_mutex_unlock, and pthread_mutex_trylock. 
Normal mutexes will usually be the fastest implementation possible for the 
machine, but will provide the least error checking. 
Recursive mutexes are primarily useful for converting old code where it is dif- 
ficult to establish clear boundaries of synchronization, for example, when you 
must call a function with a mutex locked and the function you call！or some 
function it calls！may need to lock the same mutex. I have never seen a situation 
where recursive mutexes were required to solve a problem, but I have seen many 
cases where the alternate (and usually "better") solutions were impractical. Such 
situations frequently lead developers to create recursive mutexes, and it makes 
more sense to have a single implementation available to everyone. (But your code 
will usually be easier to follow, and perform better, if you avoid recursive 
mutexes.) 
Errorcheck mutexes were devised as a debugging tool, although less intrusive 
debugging tools (where available) can be more powerful. To use errorcheck 
mutexes you must recompile code to turn the debugging feature on and off. It is far 
more useful to have an external option to force all mutexes to record debugging 
data. You may want to use errorcheck mutexes in final "production" code, of 
course, to detect serious problems early, but be aware that errorcheck mutexes 
will almost always be much slower than normal mutexes due to the extra state and 
checking. 
Default mutexes allow each implementation to provide the mutex semantics 
the vendor feels will be most useful to the target audience. It may be useful to 
make errorcheck mutexes the default, for example, to improve the threaded 
debugging environment of a system. Or the vendor may choose to make normal 
mutexes the default to give most programs the benefit of any extra speed. 
I pthread_mutexattr_gettype 
int pthread_mutexattr_gettype ( 
const pthread_mutexattr_t *attr, 
int *type); 
Specify the type of mutexes created with attr. 
X/OpenXSH5 [UNIX98] 
351 
PTHREAD 
PTHREAD 
PTHREAD 
PTHREAD_ 
MUTEX 
MUTEX 
MUTEX 
MUTEX_ 
DEFAULT 
NORMAL 
RECURSIVE 
ERRORCHECK 
type 
Unspecified type. 
Basic mutex, with no error 
checking. 
Thread can relock a mutex it 
owns. 
Checks for usage errors. 
References: 
Errors: 
Hint: 
3.2, 5.2.1, 10.1.2 
[EINVAL] type invalid. 
[EINVAL] attr invalid. 
Normal mutexes will usually be fastest; errorcheck mutexes are use- 
ful for debugging; recursive mutexes can be useful for making old 
interfaces thread-safe. 
I pthread_mutexattr_settype 
int pthread_mutexattr_settype 
pthread_mutexattr_t 
int 
*attr, 
type); 
Determine the type of mutexes created with attr. 
type 
PTHREAD MUTEX DEFAULT 
Unspecified type. 
PTHREAD MUTEX NORMAL 
pthreadmutexrecursive 
Basic mutex, with no error 
checking. 
Thread can relock a mutex it 
owns. 
pthread_mutex_errorcheck Checks for usage errors. 
References: 3.2,5.2.1,10.1.2 
Errors: [EINVAL] type invalid. 
[EINVAL] attr invalid. 
Hint: Normal mutexes will usually be fastest; errorcheck mutexes are use- 
ful for debugging; recursive mutexes can be useful for making old 
interfaces thread-safe. 
10.1.3 Set concurrency level 
When you use Pthreads implementations that schedule user threads onto 
some smaller set of kernel entities (see Section 5.6.3), it may be possible to have 
ready user threads while all kernel entities allocated to the process are busy. 
352 CHAPTER 10 Future standardization 
Some implementations, for example, "lock" a kernel entity to a user thread that 
blocks in the kernel, until the blocking condition, for example an I/O request, is 
completed. The system will create some reasonable number of kernel execution 
entities for the process, but eventually the pool of kernel entities may become 
exhausted. The process may be left with threads capable of performing useful 
work for the application, but no way to schedule them. 
The pthread_setconcurrency function addresses this limitation by allowing 
the application to ask for more kernel entities. If the application designer realizes 
that 10 out of 15 threads may at any time become blocked in the kernel, and it is 
important for those other 5 threads to be able to continue processing, then the 
application may request that the kernel supply 15 kernel entities. If it is impor- 
tant that at least 1 of those 5 continue, but not that all continue, then the 
application could request the more conservative number of 11 kernel entities. Or 
if it is OK for all threads to block once in a while, but not often, and you know 
that only rarely will more than 6 threads block at any time, the application could 
request 7 kernel entities. 
The pthread_setconcurrency function is a hint, and implementations may 
ignore it or modify the advice. You may use it freely on any system that conforms 
to the UNIX98 brand, but many systems will do nothing more than set a value 
that is returned by pthread_getconcurrency. On Digital UNIX, for example, 
there is no need to set a fixed concurrency level, because the kernel mode and 
user mode schedulers cooperate to ensure that ready user threads cannot be pre- 
vented from running by other threads blocked in the kernel. 
I pthread_getconcurrency 
int pthread_getconcurrency (); 
Returns the value set by a previous pthread_setconcurrency call. If there have 
been no previous calls to pthread_setconcurrency, returns 0 to indicate that the 
implementation is maintaining the concurrency level automatically. 
References: 5.6.3, 10.1.3 
Errors: none. 
Hint: Concurrency level is a hint. It may be ignored by any implementa- 
tion, and will be ignored by an implementation that does not need 
it to ensure concurrency. 
I pthread_setconcurrency 
int pthread_getconcurrency (int new_level); 
Allows the application to inform the threads implementation of its desired mini- 
mum concurrency level. The actual level of concurrency resulting from this call is 
unspecified. 
X/OpenXSH5[UNIX981 353 
References: 5.6.3, 10.1.3 
Errors: [einvalj new_level is negative. 
[EAGAIN] new_level exceeds a system resource. 
Hint: Concurrency level is a hint. It may be ignored by any implementa- 
tion, and will be ignored by an implementation that does not need 
it to ensure concurrency. 
10.1.4 Stack guard size 
Guard size comes from DCE threads. Most thread implementations add to the 
thread's stack a "guard" region, a page or more of protected memory. This pro- 
tected page is a safety zone, to prevent a stack overflow in one thread from 
corrupting another thread's stack. There are two good reasons for wanting to 
control a thread's guard size: 
1. It allows an application or library that allocates large data arrays on the 
stack to increase the default guard size. For example, if a thread allocates 
two pages at once, a single guard page provides little protection against 
stack overflows！the thread can corrupt adjoining memory without touch- 
ing the protected page. 
2. When creating a large number of threads, it may be that the extra page for 
each stack can become a severe burden. In addition to the extra page, the 
kernel's memory manager has to keep track of the differing protection on 
adjoining pages, which may strain system resources. Therefore, you may 
sometimes need to ask the system to "trust you" and avoid allocating any 
guard pages at all for your threads. You can do this by requesting a guard 
size of 0 bytes. 
I pthread_attr_getguardsize 
int pthread_attr_getguardsize ( 
const pthread_attr_t *attr, 
size_t *guardsize); 
Determine the size of the guard region for the stack on which threads created with 
attr will run. 
References: 2, 5.2.3 
Errors: [EINVAL] attr invalid. 
Hint: Specify 0 to fit lots of stacks in an address space, or increase default 
guardsize for threads that allocate large buffers on the stack. 
354 CHAPTER 10 Future standardization 
I pthread_attr_setguardsize 
int pthread_attr_setguardsize ( 
pthread_attr_t *attr, 
size_t guardsize); 
Threads created with attr will run on a stack with guardsize bytes protected 
against stack overflow. The implementation may round guardsize up to the next 
multiple of PAGESIZE. Specifying a value of 0 for guardsize will cause threads 
created using the attributes object to run without stack overflow protection. 
References: 2, 5.2.3 
Errors: [EINVAL] guardsize or attr invalid. 
Hint: Specify 0 to fit lots of stacks in an address space, or increase default 
guardsize for threads that allocate large buffers on the stack. 
10.1.5 Parallel I/O 
Many high-performance systems, such as database engines, use threads, at 
least in part, to gain performance through parallel I/O. Unfortunately, Pthreads 
doesn't directly support parallel I/O. That is, two threads can independently 
issue I/O operations for files, or even for the same file, but the POSIX file I/O 
model places some restrictions on the level of parallelism. 
One bottleneck is that the current file position is an attribute of the file descrip- 
tor. To read or write data from or to a specific position within a file, a thread must 
call lseek to seek to the proper byte offset in the file, and then read or write. If 
more than one thread does this at the same time, the first thread might seek, and 
then the second thread seek to a different place before the first thread can issue 
the read or write operation. 
The X/Open pread and pwrite functions offer a solution, by making the seek 
and read or write combination atomic. Threads can issue pread or pwrite opera- 
tions in parallel, and, in principle, the system can process those I/O requests 
completely in parallel without locking the file descriptor. 
I pread 
size_t pread ( 
int fildes, 
void *buf, 
size_t nbyte, 
off_t offset); 
Read nbyte bytes from offset offset in the file opened on file descriptor fildes, 
placing the result into buf. The file descriptor's current offset is not affected, allow- 
ing multiple pread and/or pwrite operations to proceed in parallel. 
X/OpenXSH5[UNIX98] 355 
References: none 
Errors: [einval] offset is negative. 
[ eoverflow] attempt to read beyond maximum. 
[ENXIO] request outside capabilities of device. 
[ESPIPE] file is pipe. 
Hint: Allows high-performance parallel I/O. 
pwrite 
size t pwrite ( 
int 
const void 
size t 
off t 
fildes, 
*buf, 
nbyte, 
offset); 
Write nbyte bytes to offset offset in the file opened on file descriptor f ildes, from 
buf. The file descriptor's current offset is not affected, allowing multiplepread and/ 
or pwrite operations to proceed in parallel. 
References: none 
Errors: [EIKVAL] offset is negative. 
[ESPIPE] file is pipe. 
Hint: Allows high-performance parallel I/O. 
10.1.6 Cancellation points 
Most UNIX systems support a substantial number of interfaces that do not 
come from POSIX. The select and poll interfaces, for example, should be 
deferred cancellation points. Pthreads did not require these functions to be can- 
cellation points, however, because they do not exist within POSIX. 1. 
The select and poll functions, however, along with many others, exist in 
X/Open. The XSH5 standard includes an expanded list of cancellation points 
covering X/Open interfaces. 
Additional functions that must be cancellation points in XSH5: 
getmsg 
getpmsg 
lockf 
msgrcv 
msgsnd 
poll 
pread 
putmsg 
putpmsg 
pwrite 
readv 
select 
sigpause 
usleep 
wait3 
waitid 
writev 
356 
CHAPTER 10 Future standardization 
Additional functions that may be cancellation points in XSH5: 
catclose 
catgets 
catopen 
closelog 
dbm close 
dbm delete 
dbm fetch 
dbm nextkey 
dbm open 
dbm store 
dlclose 
dlopen 
endgrent 
endpwent 
endutxent 
fgetwc 
fgetws 
fputwc 
fputws 
fseeko 
fsetpos 
ftello 
ftw 
fwprintf 
fwscanf 
getgrent 
getpwent 
getutxent 
getutxid 
getutxline 
getw 
getwc 
getwchar 
iconv close 
iconv open 
ioctl 
mkstemp 
nf tw 
openlog 
pclose 
popen 
pututxline 
putw 
putwc 
putwchar 
readdir r 
seekdir 
semop 
setgrent 
setpwent 
setutxent 
syslog 
ungetwc 
vfprintf 
vfwprintf 
vprintf 
vwprintf 
wprintf 
wscanf 
10.2 POSIX1003.1J 
Condition variable wait clock: 
int pthread_condattr_getclock ( 
const pthread_condattr_t *attr, 
clockid_t *clock_id); 
int pthread_condattr_setclock ( 
pthread_condattr_t *attr, 
clockid t clock id); 
Barriers: 
int barrier_attr_init (barrier_attr_t *attr); 
int barrier_attr_destroy (barrier_attr_t *attr); 
int barrier_attr_getpshared ( 
const barrier_attr_t *attr, int *pshared); 
int barrier_attr_setpshared ( 
barrier_attr_t *attr, int pshared); 
int barrier_init (barrier_t *barrier, 
const barrier_attr_t *attr, int count); 
int barrier_destroy (barrier_t *barrier); 
int barrier wait (barrier t *barrier); 
POSIX 1003. lj 
357 
Reader/writer locks: 
int rwlock_attr_init (rwlock_attr_t *attr); 
int rwlock_attr_destroy (rwlock_attr_t *attr); 
int rwlock_attr_getpshared ( 
const rwlock_attr_t *attr, int *pshared); 
int rwlock_attr_setpshared ( 
rwlock_attr_t *attr, int pshared); 
int rwlock_init ( 
rwlock_t *lock, const rwlock_attr_t *attr); 
int rwlock_destroy (rwlock_t *lock); 
int rwlock_rlock (rwlock_t *lock); 
int rwlock_timedrlock (rwlock_t *lock, 
const struct timespec *timeout); 
int rwlock_tryrlock (rwlock_t *lock); 
int rwlock_wlock (rwlock_t *lock); 
int rwlock_timedwlock (rwlock_t *lock, 
const struct timespec *timeout); 
int rwlock_trywlock (rwlock_t *lock); 
int rwlock unlock (rwlock t *lock); 
Spinlocks: 
int spin_init (spinlock_t *lock); 
int spin_destroy (spinlock_t *lock); 
int spin_lock (spinlock_t *lock); 
int spin_trylock (spinlock_t *lock); 
int spin_unlock (spinlock_t *lock); 
int pthread_spin_init (pthread_spinlock_t *lock); 
int pthread_spin_destroy (pthread_spinlock_t *lock); 
int pthread_spin_lock (pthread_spinlock_t *lock); 
int pthread_spin_trylock (pthread_spinlock_t *lock); 
int pthread spin unlock (pthread spinlock_t *lock); 
Thread abort: 
int pthread_abort (pthread_t thread); 
The same POSIX working group that developed POSIX. lb and Pthreads has 
developed a new set of extensions for realtime and threaded programming. Most 
of the extensions relevant to threads (and to this book) are the result of proposals 
developed by the POSIX 1003.14 profile group, which specialized in "tuning" the 
existing POSIX standards for multiprocessor systems. 
POSIX. lj adds some thread synchronization mechanisms that have been com- 
mon in a wide range of multiprocessor and thread programming, but that had been 
omitted from the original Pthreads standard. Barriers and spinlocks are primarily 
useful for fine-grained parallelism, for example, in systems that automatically 
358 CHAPTER 10 Future standardization 
generate parallel code from program loops. Read/write locks are useful in shared 
data algorithms where many threads are allowed to read simultaneously, but only 
one thread can be allowed to update data. 
10.2.1 Barriers 
"Barriers" are a form of synchronization most commonly used in parallel 
decomposition of loops. They're almost never used except in code designed to run 
only on multiprocessor systems. A barrier is a "meeting place" for a group of 
associated threads, where each will wait until all have reached the barrier. When 
the last one waits on the barrier, all the participating threads are released. 
See Section 7.1.1 for details of barrier behavior and for an example showing 
how to implement a barrier using standard Pthreads synchronization. (Note that 
the behavior of this example is not precisely the same as that proposed by 
POSIX.lj.) 
10.2.2 Read/write locks 
A read/write lock (also sometimes known as "reader/writer lock") allows one 
thread to exclusively lock some shared data to write or modify that data, but also 
allows multiple threads to simultaneously lock the data for read access. UNIX98 
specifies "read/write locks" very similar to POSIX. lj reader /writer locks. Although 
X/Open intends that the two specifications will be functionally identical, the 
names are different to avoid conflict should the POSIX standard change before 
approval.* 
If your code relies on a data structure that is frequently referenced, but only 
occasionally updated, you should consider using a read/write lock rather than a 
mutex to access that data. Most threads will be able to read the data without 
waiting; they'll need to block only when some thread is in the process of modify- 
ing the data. (Similarly, a thread that desires to write the data will be blocked if 
any threads are reading the data.) 
See Section 7.1.2 for details of read/write lock behavior and for an example 
showing how to implement a read/write lock using standard Pthreads synchroni- 
zation. (Note that the behavior of this example is not precisely the same as that 
proposed by POSIX. lj.) 
*The POSIX working group is considering the possibility of adapting the XSH5 read/write 
lock definition and abandoning the original POSIX. lj names, but the decision hasn't yet been 
made. 
POSIX 1003. lj 359 
10.2.3 Spinlocks 
Spinlocks are much like mutexes. There's been a lot of discussion about 
whether it even makes sense to standardize on a spinlock interface！since POSIX 
specifies only a source level API, there's very little POSIX. lj says about them that 
distinguishes them from mutexes. The essential idea is that a spinlock is the 
most primitive and fastest synchronization mechanism available on a given hard- 
ware architecture. On some systems, that may be a single "test and set" 
instruction！on others, it may be a substantial sequence of "load locked, test, 
store conditional, memory barrier" instructions. 
The critical distinction is that a thread trying to lock a spinlock does not nec- 
essarily block when the spinlock is already held by another thread. The intent is 
that the thread will "spin," retrying the lock rapidly until it succeeds in locking 
the spinlock. (This is one of the "iffy" spots！on a uniprocessor it had better 
block, or it'll do nothing but spin out the rest of its timeslice ... or spin to eter- 
nity if it isn't timesliced.) 
Spinlocks are great for fine-grained parallelism, when the code is intended to 
run only on a multiprocessor, carefully tuned to hold the spinlock for only a few 
instructions, and getting ultimate performance is more important than sharing 
the system resources cordially with other processes. To be effective, a spinlock 
must never be locked for as long as it takes to "context switch" from one thread to 
another. If it does take as long or longer, you'll get better overall performance by 
blocking and allowing some other thread to do useful work. 
POSIX. lj contains two sets of spinlock functions: one set with a spin_ prefix, 
which allows spinlock synchronization between processes; and the other set with 
a pthread_ prefix, allowing spinlock synchronization between threads within a 
process. This, you will notice, is very different from the model used for mutexes, 
condition variables, and read/write locks, where the same functions were used 
and the pshared attribute specifies whether the resulting synchronization object 
can be shared between processes. 
The rationale for this is that spinlocks are intended to be very fast, and should 
not be subject to any possible overhead as a result of needing to decide, at run 
time, how to behave. It is, in fact, unlikely that the implementation of spin_lock 
and pthread_spin_lock will differ on most systems, but the standard allows 
them to be different. 
10.2.4 Condition variable wait clock 
Pthreads condition variables support only "absolute time" timeouts. That is, 
the thread specifies that it is willing to wait until "Jan 1 00:00:00 GMT 2001," 
rather than being able to specify that it wants to wait for  hour, 10 minutes." 
The reason for this is that a condition variable wait is subject to wakeups for var- 
ious reasons that are beyond your control or not easy to control. When you wake 
early from a " 1 hour, 10 minute" wait it is difficult to determine how much of that 
360 CHAPTER 10 Future standardization 
time is left. But when you wake early from the absolute wait, your target time is 
still "Jan 1 00:00:00 GMT 2001." (The reasons for early wakeup are discussed in 
Section 3.3.2.) 
Despite all this excellent reasoning, "relative time" waits are useful. One 
important advantage is that absolute system time is subject to external changes. 
It might be modified to correct for an inaccurate clock chip, or brought up-to-date 
with a network time server, or adjusted for any number of other reasons. Both 
relative time waits and absolute time waits remain correct across that adjust- 
ment, but a relative time wait expressed as if it were an absolute time wait 
cannot. That is, when you want to wait for " 1 hour, 10 minutes," but the best you 
can do is add that interval to the current clock and wait until that clock time, the 
system can't adjust the absolute timeout for you when the system time is 
changed. 
POSIX. lj addresses this issue as part of a substantial and pervasive "cleanup" 
of POSIX time services. The standard (building on top of POSIX. lb, which intro- 
duced the realtime clock functions, and the clock_realtime clock) introduces a 
new system clock called clock_monotonic. This new clock isn't a "relative timer" 
in the traditional sense, but it is never decreased, and it is never modified by date 
or time changes on the system. It increases at a constant rate. A "relative time" 
wait is nothing more than taking the current absolute value of the clock_monotonic 
clock, adding some fixed offset D200 seconds for a wait of 1 hour and 10 minutes), 
and waiting until that value of the clock is reached. 
This is accomplished by adding the condition variable attribute clock. You set 
the clock attribute in a thread attributes object using pthread_condattr_setclock 
and request the current value by calling pthread_condattr_getclock. The default 
value is clock_monotonic, on the assumption that most condition waits are 
intervals. 
While this assumption may be incorrect, and it may seem to be an incompati- 
ble change from Pthreads (and it is, in a way), this was swept under the rug due 
to the fact that the timed condition wait function suffered from a problem that 
POSIX. lj found to be extremely common through the existing body of POSIX 
standards. "Time" in general was only very loosely defined. A timed condition 
wait, for example, does not say precisely what the timeout argument means. Only 
that "an error is returned if the absolute time specified by abstime passes (that is, 
system time equals or exceeds abstime)." The intent is clear！but there are no spe- 
cific implementation or usage directives. One might reasonably assume that one 
should acquire the current time using clock_gettime (clock_realtime, snow), as 
suggested in the associated rationale. However, POSIX "rationale" is little more 
than historical commentary, and is not part of the formal standard. Furthermore, 
clock_gettime is a part of the optional _posix_timers subset of POSIX. lb, and 
therefore may not exist on many systems supporting threads. 
POSIX. lj is attempting to "rationalize" all of these loose ends, at least for systems 
that implement the eventual POSIX. lj standard. Of course, the clock_monotonic 
feature is under an option of its own, and additionally relies on the _posix_timers 
POSIX 1003.14 361 
option, so it isn't a cure-all. In the absence of these options, there is no clock 
attribute, and no way to be sure of relative timeout behavior！or even completely 
portable behavior. 
10.2.5 Thread abort 
The pthread_abort function is essentially fail-safe cancellation. It is used only 
when you want to be sure the thread will terminate immediately. The dangerous 
aspect of pthread_abort is that the thread does not run cleanup handlers or have 
any other opportunity to clean up after itself. That is, if the target thread has a 
mutex locked, the thread will terminate with the mutex still locked. Because you 
cannot unlock the mutex from another thread, the application must be prepared 
to abandon that mutex entirely. Further, it means that any other threads that 
might be waiting for the abandoned mutex will continue to wait for the mutex for- 
ever unless they are also terminated by calling pthread_abort. 
In general, real applications cannot recover from aborting a thread, and you 
should never, ever, use pthread_abort. However, for a certain class of applications 
this capability is required. Imagine, for example, a realtime embedded control sys- 
tem that cannot shut down and must run reliably across any transient failure in 
some algorithm. Should a thread encounter a rare boundary condition bug, and 
hang, the application must recover. 
In such a system, all wait operations use timeouts, because realtime response 
is critical. Should one thread detect that something hasn't happened in a reason- 
able time, for example, a navigational thread hasn't received sensor input, it will 
notify an "error manager." If the error manager cannot determine why the thread 
monitoring the sensor hasn't responded, it will try to recover. It may attempt to 
cancel the sensor thread to achieve a safe shutdown, but if the sensor thread fails 
to respond to the cancel in a reasonable time, the application must continue any- 
way. The error manager would then abort the sensor thread, analyze and correct 
any data structures it might have corrupted, create and advertise new mutexes if 
necessary, and create a new sensor thread. 
10.3 POSIX 1003.14 
POSIX.14 is a different sort of standard, a "POSIX Standard profile." Unlike 
Pthreads and POSIX. lj, POSIX. 14 does not add any new capabilities to the POSIX 
family. Instead, it attempts to provide some order to the maze of options that 
faces implementors and users of POSIX. 
The POSIX.14 specifies which POSIX optional behavior should be considered 
"required" for multiprocessor hardware systems. It also raises some of the mini- 
mum values denned for various POSIX limits. The POSIX.14 working group also 
362 CHAPTER 10 Future standardization 
devised recommendations for additional POSIX interfaces based on the substan- 
tial multiprocessing and threading experience of the members. Many of the inter- 
faces developed by POSIX. 14 have been included in the POSIX. lj draft standard. 
Once POSIX. 14 becomes a standard, in theory, producers of POSIX imple- 
mentations will be able to claim conformance to POSIX. 14. And those who wish 
to develop multithreaded applications may find it convenient to look for POSIX. 14 
conformance rather than simply Pthreads conformance. (It remains to be seen 
whether vendors or users will actually do this, since experience with POSIX Stan- 
dard Profiles is currently slight.} 
The POSIX. 14 working group also tried to address important issues such as 
these: 
? Providing a way for threaded code to determine the number of active 
processors. 
? Providing a way for threads to be "bound" onto physical processors. 
? Providing a "processor management" command to control which processors 
are used by the system. 
Although these capabilities are universally available in all multiprocessor sys- 
tems of which the working group was aware, they were dropped from the 
standard because of many unresolved issues, including these: 
? What good does it do to know how many processors there are, if you cannot 
tell how many your code may use at any time? Remember, the information 
can change while you are asking for it. What is really needed is a function 
asking the question "Would the current process benefit from creation of 
another thread?" We don't know how to answer that question, or how to 
provide enough information on all reasonable architectures that the appli- 
cation can answer it. 
? How can we bind a thread to a processor across a wide range of multipro- 
cessor architecture? On a nonuniform memory access system, for example, 
representing the processors as a uniform array of integer identifiers would 
be misleading and useless！binding one thread to processor 0 and another 
closely cooperative thread to processor 1 might put them across a relatively 
slow communications port rather than on two processors sharing a bank of 
memory. 
Eventually, some standards organization (possibly POSIX) will need to address 
these issues and develop portable interfaces. The folks who attempt this feat may 
find that they need to limit the scope of the standard to a field narrower than 
"systems on which people may wish to use threads." 
Bibliography 
[Anderson, 1991] Thomas E. Anderson, Brian N. Bershad, Edward D. Lazowska, 
and Henry M. Levy, "Scheduler Activations: Effective Kernel Support for the 
User-Level Management of Parallelism," Proceedings of the Thirteenth ACM 
Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, October 1991. 
Research paper describing the addition of an efficient "two-level scheduler" 
mechanism for operating systems. This is where all modern two-level sched- 
uler systems started！everyone's read it, everyone references it, and every- 
one's been inspired by it. 
[Birrell, 1989] Andrew D. Birrell, An Introduction to Programming with Threads, 
SRC Research Report 35, Digital Systems Research Center, 130 Lytton Ave., 
Palo Alto, CA 94301, January 1989. Available on Internet from http:// 
www.research.digital.com/SRC/publications/src-rr.html 
An introduction to the concepts of threaded programming. Although specifi- 
cally oriented toward Modula-2+ and SRC's Taos multithreaded operating 
system, many essential concepts remain easily recognizable in Pthreads. 
[Boykin, 1993] Joseph Boykin, David Kirschen, Alan Langerman, and Susan 
LoVerso, Programming under Mach, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, ISBN 
0-201-52739-1, 1993. 
[Custer, 1993] Helen Custer, Inside Windows NT, Microsoft Press, ISBN 1-55615- 
481-X, 1993. 
[Digital, 1996] Digital Equipment Corporation, Guide to DECthreads, Digital 
Equipment Corporation, part number AA-Q2DPC-TK, 1996. 
Reference manual for Digital's DECthreads implementation of the Pthreads 
standard. An appendix (which will be removed after the Digital UNIX 4.0 and 
OpenVMS 7.0 versions) provides reference information on the obsolete cma 
and DCE threads (POSIX 1003.4a draft 4) interfaces. 
[Dijkstra, 1965] E. W. Dijkstra, "Solution of a Problem in Concurrent Program- 
ming Control," Communications of the ACM, Vol. 8 (9), September 1965, pp. 
569-570. 
[Dijkstra, 1968a] E. W. Dijkstra, "Cooperating Sequential Processes," Program- 
ming Languages, edited by F. Genuys, Academic Press, New York, 1968, pp. 
43-112. 
[Dijkstra, 1968b] E. W. Dijkstra, 'The Structure of the THE'！Multiprogramming 
System," Communications of the ACM, Vol. 11 E), 1968, pp. 341-346. 
363 
364 Bibliography 
[Gallmeister, 1995] Bill O. Gallmeister, POSIX.4: Programming for the Real World, 
O'Reilly, Sebastopol, CA, ISBN 1-56592-074-0, 1995. 
POSIX 1003. lb-1993 realtime programming (based on a near-final draft of the 
standard). 
[Hoare, 1974] C.A.R. Hoare, "Monitors: An Operating System Structuring Con- 
cept," Communications of the ACM, Vol. 17 A0), 1974, pp. 549-557. 
[IEEE, 1996] 9945-1:1996 (ISO/IEC) [IEEE/ANSI Std 1003.1 1996 Edition] Infor- 
mation Technology！Portable Operating System Interface (POSIX)！Part 1: 
System Application: Program Interface (API) [C Language] (ANSI), IEEE Stan- 
dards Press, ISBN 1-55937-573-6, 1996. 
The POSIX C Language interfaces, including realtime and threads. 
[Jones, 1991] Michael B. Jones, "Bringing the C Libraries With Us into a Multi- 
Threaded Future," Winter 1991 Usenix Conference Proceedings, Dallas, TX, 
January 1991, pp. 81-91. 
[Kleiman, 1996] Steve Kleiman, Devang Shah, and Bart Smaalders, Program- 
ming with Threads, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, ISBN 0-13-172389-8, 
1996. 
This book shares some characteristics with the book you are holding. Both, 
for example, involve authors who were directly involved in the POSIX standard 
working group, and were also principal architects of their respective compa- 
nies' thread implementations. 
[Lea, 1997] Doug Lea, Concurrent Programming in Java?, Addison-Wesley, Read- 
ing, MA, ISBN 0-201-69581-2, 1997. 
A different view of threads, from the perspective of the Java? language, which 
provides unique constructs for thread synchronization within the language. 
[Lewis, 1995] Bil Lewis and Daniel J. Berg, Threads Primer, SunSoft Press, ISBN 
0-13-443698-9, 1995. 
A good introduction to threaded programming for the novice. The first edition 
primarily deals with Solaris "UI threads," with some information on POSIX 
threads. 
[Lockhart, 1994] Harold W. Lockhart, Jr., OSFDCE, Guide to Developing Distrib- 
uted Applications, McGraw-Hill, New York, ISBN 0-07-911481-4, 1994. 
A chapter on DCE threads describes how to use threads in building DCE 
applications. 
[McJones, 1989] Paul F. McJones and Garret F. Swart, "Evolving the UNIX Sys- 
tem Interface to Support Multithreaded Programs," SRC Research Report 21, 
Digital Systems Research Center, 130 Lytton Ave., Palo Alto, CA 94301, Sep- 
tember 1989. Available on Internet from http://www.research.digital.com/ 
SRC/publications/src-rr.html 
Report on adaptation of UNIX system for multithreaded programming. 
Bibliography 365 
[Schimmel, 1994] Curt Schimmel, UNIX Systems for Modern Architectures, Addi- 
son-Wesley, Reading, MA, ISBN 0-201-63338-8, 1994. 
Substantial detail on the implementation of multiprocessors and shared 
memory systems. If Section 3.4 in the book you're holding doesn't satisfy your 
thirst for knowledge, this is where you should go. 
Thread resources on the Internet 
In the midst of the word he was trying to say, 
In the midst of his laughter and glee, 
He had softly and suddenly vanished away！ 
For the Snark was a Boojum, you see. 
THE END 
！Lewis Carroll, The Hunting of the Snark 
This list provides a few starting points for information. Of course, the web 
changes all the time, so no list committed to paper will ever be completely correct. 
That's life in the information age. 
Newsgroups 
comp.programming.threads 
General, unmoderated discussion of anything related to threads. This group is 
frequented by a number of people highly knowledgeable about threads in general, 
and about various specific implementations of Pthreads. It's a nice, friendly place 
to ask about problems you're having, or things you would like to do. Please, don't 
ask about screensavers! And, if you want to ask about a problem, always remem- 
ber to tell us what type of hardware and operating system you're using and 
include the version. 
comp.unix.os?.os?1 
The primary discussion group for the Digital UNIX operating system. There 
are, of course, historical reasons for the nonintuitive name. This is a reasonable 
place to ask questions about using threads on Digital UNIX. If the question (or 
problem) doesn't seem to be specific to Digital UNIX, comp. programming. threads 
may be more appropriate, because it presents your question to a larger audience 
of thread experts, and makes the answer available to a larger audience of thread 
users. 
comp.unix.Solaris 
The primary discussion group for the Solaris operating system. This is a rea- 
sonable place to ask questions about using threads on Solaris. If the question (or 
problem) doesn't seem to be specific to Solaris, comp.programming.threads may 
367 
368 Thread resources on the Internet 
be more appropriate, because it presents your question to a larger audience of 
thread experts, and makes the answer available to a larger audience of thread 
users. 
Web sites 
http://altavista.digital.com/ 
AltaVista is a multithreaded web search engine developed by Digital Equip- 
ment Corporation. It is also an excellent search engine that you can use to find 
out about nearly anything. Always a good place to start. 
http://www.aw.com/cp/butenhof/posix.html 
The Addison-Wesley web page containing information about this book, includ- 
ing the source for all the example programs. 
http://www.best.com/-bos/threads-faq/ 
This page is a list of frequently asked questions (FAQ) from the comp. program- 
ming, threads newsgroup. Please read this before you read comp. programming. 
threads, in order to avoid asking a wide range of questions that have been asked 
a million times before. The information in this page is also posted to the news- 
group at regular intervals. 
http://liinwww.ira.uka.de/bibliography/Os/threads.html 
A searchable bibliography of terms related to threading, maintained by the 
University of Oslo in Norway. 
http://www.digital.com/ 
Digital Equipment Corporation web site. This site includes a lot of information 
on the Digital UNIX and OpenVMS operating systems, including information on 
threads and multiprocessor systems. 
http://www.sun.com/ 
Sun Microsystems, Inc., web site. This site includes, as you might guess, a lot 
of information on the Solaris operating system. You can also find information 
about the Java language, which provides an interesting variant of thread support 
by making thread synchronization an explicit attribute of a class method. 
http://www.sgi.com/ 
Silicon Graphics, Inc., web site. Information on SGI systems and the IRIX 
operating system. 
http: / /www. netcom. com/-brownel 1 /pthreads++. html 
Information on an attempt to "define a standardized approach to the use of 
threading in the C++ language." 
Index 
Abort thread, 361 
alo_read, 230 
aio_write, 230 
Allocation domain, 181-183 
Amdahl's Law, 21-22, 297 
ANSIC 
and cancellation, 151 
and deadlocks, 298 
and destructor functions, 168 
and fork handlers, 199-200 
and kernel entities, 189-190 
library, runtime, 284 
and priority inversions, 300 
prototype for Pthread interfaces, 
310-346 
and sequence races, 296 
and signals, 217 
and threading, 24-25 
void*, use of, 311 
See also Stdio (function) 
Apple Macintosh toolbox, 23 
asctime_r (function), 213, 339-340 
Assembly language and threading, 
24-25 
Assembly line. See Pipeline program- 
ming model 
Asynchronous 
cancelability, 150-154, 249 
communication between processes, 8 
definition of, 2, 4 
I/O operations, 22-23 
programming, 8-12, 15-21 
sigwait, 227-230 
and UNIX, 9-11 
See also Memory, visibility 
Async-signal safe functions, 198, 234 
Atomicity, 61, 72-73, 93 
Attribute objects 
condition variable attributes, 137-138 
definition of, 134-135 
and detaching, 37, 43, 231 
mutex attributes, 135-136, 185 
thread attributes, 138-141, 174, 181, 
231 
Bailing programmers 
barriers analogy, 242 
cancellation analogy, 143 
condition variable analogy, 71 
mutex analogy, 47-48 
overview of, 3-4 
thread-specific data analogy, 162-163 
Barriers 
definition of, 241 
memory, 92-95 
POSIX 1003.lj, 358 
and synchronization, extended, 
242-253 
See also Condition variables; Mutexes 
Blocking threads, 42 
Broadcast 
and condition variables, 72-76, 80-82 
and memory visibility, 89 
and work crews, 109 
C language. See ANSI C 
Cache lines, 304-305 
Cancellation 
asynchronous, 150-154, 249 
cleanup handlers, 147, 154-161 
deferred, 147-150, 249 
definition of, 142-147 
fail-safe in POSIX 1003. lj, 361 
interfaces, 323-325 
points, list of, 147-148 
points in XSH5, 355-356 
state, 143-144 
type, 143-144 
Cleanup handlers, 147, 154-161 
Client server programming model, 
120-129 
369 
370 
Index 
clock_gettime (function), 13 
CLOCK_MONOTONIC (value), 360 
Code. See Programs, examples of 
Communication. See Condition variables 
Computing overhead and threads, 26 
Concurrency 
benefit of threading, 22-24 
control functions, definition of, 
7-8 
definition of, 4-5 
level in XSH5, 351-353 
and parallelism, 5-6 
serialization, avoidance of, 302-303 
and thread implementation, 190 
See also Asynchronous; Threads 
Condition variables 
attributes, 137-138 
and blocked threads, 42 
and client-server programming model, 
121 
broadcasting, 81-82 
creating and destroying, 74-76 
definition of, 8 
interfaces, 319-322 
and pipeline programming model, 101 
and semaphores, 237 
sharing, avoidance of, 300 
signaling, 81-82 
as a synchronization mechanism, 4, 8, 
30, 70-73 
and thread-safety, 6-7 
wait clock (POSIX 1003.1J), 359-361 
waiting on, 77-81 
waking waiters, 81-82 
and work crew programming model, 
107 
See also Barriers; Mutexes; Predicates; 
Signals 
Contention scope, 181-183 
Context structure, 6-7 
Critical sections, 46 
ctime_r (function), 213, 340 
DCE threads, 154, 290, 353 
Deadlocks 
avoidance of, 26-27, 297-299 
and lock hierarchy, 63-69 
and signals, 215 
and thread-safe libraries, 284-285 
See also Priority inversions 
Debugging, threads 
cache lines, 304-305 
concurrent serialization, avoidance of, 
302-303 
condition variable sharing, avoidance 
of, 300 
and costs of threading, 13, 27-28 
deadlocks, avoidance of, 297-299 
introduction to, 13 
memory corrupters, avoidance of, 301 
mutexes, right number of, 303-304 
priority inversions, avoidance of, 
299-300 
thread inertia, avoidance of, 291-293 
thread race, avoidance of, 293-297 
tools for, 290, 302 
See also Errors 
Default mutexes, 349-351 
Deferred cancelability, 147-150, 249 
Destructor functions, 167-172 
Detach 
creating and using threads, 37-39 
and multiple threads, 17-19 
termination, 43 
and thread attributes, 138-141 
Digital UNIX 
mutex error detection and reporting, 
311 
thread debugging library, 290 
programming examples, introduction 
to, 12-13 
detecting memory corrupters, 301 
SIGEV-THREAD implementation, 231 
Dijkstra, EdsgerW., 47 
Directory searching function, 212 
E 
EAGAIN (error), 314, 318, 326, 344, 353 
EBUSY (error), 49, 58, 65, 318-321, 345 
EDEADLK (error), 32, 318-319, 346 
EINTR (error), 346 
EINVAL (error), 312-326, 343-346, 
351-355 
Encapsulation, 24, 75 
ENOMEM (error), 313, 317-321, 326, 336 
ENOSPC (error), 345 
ENOSYS (error), 312-316, 344-346 
Index 
371 
ENXIO (error), 355 
EOVERFLOW (error), 355 
EPERM (error), 318, 345 
ERANGE (error), 210, 341-342 
err_abort, 33-34 
errno, 31-34, 117, 228 
errno_abort, 33-34 
errno.h (header file), 32-33 
Error detection and reporting, 310-311 
Errorcheck mutexes, 349-351 
Errors 
EAGAIN, 314, 318, 326, 344, 353 
EBUSY, 49, 58, 65, 318-321, 345 
EDEADLK, 32, 318-319, 346 
EINTR, 346 
EINVAL, 312-326, 343-346, 351-355 
ENOMEM, 313, 317-321, 326, 336 
ENOSPC, 345 
ENOSYS, 312-316, 344-346 
ENXIO, 355 
EOVERFLOW, 355 
EPERM, 318, 345 
ERANGE, 210, 341-342 
ESPIPE, 355 
ESRCH, 32, 314, 323, 343 
ETIMEDOUT, 78, 80, 86, 322 
errors.h (header file), 13 
ESPIPE (error), 355 
ESRCH (error), 32, 314, 323, 343 
ETIMEDOUT (error), 78, 80, 86, 322 
Events 
and concurrency, 23-24 
as a synchronization mechanism, 8 
Exec, 204 
Execution context 
architectural overview, 30 
definition of, 7-8 
fgets (function), 14 
flockfile (function), 121, 205-207, 
336-337 
Fork 
in asynchronous program, 15, 19 
definition of, 197-198 
handlers, 199-203, 336 
ftrylockfile (function), 207, 337 
funlockfile (function), 121, 205-207, 337 
G 
Gallmeister, Bill, 294 
getc (function), 207 
getchar (function), 207 
getchar_unlocked (function), 207-209, 
338 
getc_unlocked (function), 207-208, 337 
getgrgid_r (function), 341 
getgrnam_r (function), 341 
getlogin_r (function), 210, 339 
getpwnam_r (function), 342 
getpwuid_r (function), 342 
gmtime_r (function), 340 
Group and user database function, 
213-214 
H 
Hard realtime, 172-173 
inheritsched (attribute), 138-141, 176 
Initial (main) thread 
and creation, 40-42 
initialization, onetime, 131-134 
overview of, 36-37 
signal mask, 216 
Initialization, 131-134 
Invariants 
and condition variables, 71, 75 
definition of, 45-46 
and mutexes, 61-64 
See also Predicates 
I/O operations 
and blocked threads, 42 
and cancellation points, 148-149 
candidate for threads, 29 
and concurrency, 22-23 
parallel in XSH5, 354-355 
Join, 37-39, 139, 145 
Kernel entities 
and contention scope thread, 182 
implementation of, 189 
many to few (two level), 193-195 
many to one (user level), 190-191 
372 
Index 
Kernel entities (continued) 
one to one (kernel level), 191-193 
setting in XSH5, 351-353 
L 
Libraries 
for debugging, 290 
implementation, 190 
legacy, 285-287 
thread-safe, 283-285 
Light weight processes, 1 
limits.h (file header), 308 
localtime_r (function), 340 
LWP. See Kernel entities 
M 
Main (initial) thread 
and creation, 40-42 
initialization, one time, 131-134 
overview of, 36-37 
signal mask, 216 
Many to few (two level) implementation, 
193-195 
Many to one (user level) implementation, 
190-191 
Memory 
barriers, 92-95 
coherence, 47, 92 
conflict, 94 
corrupters, avoidance of, 301 
leaks, 198 
ordering, 48, 90, 92-93 
stack guard size in XSH5, 353-354 
visibility, 26, 88-95, 294 
Message queues, 30 
Microsoft Windows, 23 
MIMD (multiple instruction, multiple 
data), 107 
MPP (massively parallel processor), 5 
Multiprocessors 
and allocation domain, 182 
candidate for threads, 29 
and concurrency, 1, 4！5 
and deadlock, 65 
definition of, 5 
memory architecture, 91-95 
and parallelism, 5-6, 20-22 
and thread implementation, 191-193 
and thread inertia, 291-293 
and thread race, 293-297 
Multithreaded programming model. See 
Threads 
Mutexes 
and atomicity, 61, 72-73 
attributes, 135-136 
and blocked threads, 42, 51 
and client-server programming model, 
121 
creating and destroying, 49-51 
and deadlocks, 26-27, 63, 66-69, 
297-299 
definition of, 8, 47-49 
interfaces, 316-319 
and invariants, 61-64 
lock chaining, 70 
lock hierarchy, 63-70 
locking and unlocking, 52-58 
multiple, use of, 63-64 
non-blocking locks, 58-61 
number of, 303-304 
and pipeline programming model, 
100-101 
priority ceiling, 186-187, 300 
priority inheritance, 186-188, 300, 
307 
priority inversions, 26-27, 63, 
184-186, 299-300 
priority-aware, 185-186 
and semaphores, 236 
sizing of, 62-63 
as a synchronization mechanism, 8, 
30 
and thread-safety, 6-7, 62 
types inXSH5, 349-351 
and work crew programming model, 
108-110 
See also Barriers; Condition variables; 
Memory, visibility; Read/write locks 
Mutually exclusive. See Mutexes 
N 
Network servers and clients, 
99 9*3 
Normal mutexes, 349-351 
NULL (value), 167 
Index 
373 
Object oriented programming and 
threading, 25 
One to one (kernel level) implementation, 
191-193 
Opaque, 31, 36, 163 
Open Software Foundation's Distributed 
Computing Environment, 154 
Paradigms, 25 
Parallel decomposition. See Work crews 
Parallelism 
and asynchronous programming, 
11-12 
benefit of threading, 20-25 
candidate for threads, 29 
definition of, 5-6 
and thread-safety, 6-7 
See also Concurrency 
Performance 
as a benefit of threading, 20-22 
as a cost of threading, 26 
and mutexes, 62-63 
problems, avoidance of, 302-305 
Pipeline programming model, 97-105 
Pipes, 30 
Polymorphism, 24 
POSIX 
architectural overview, 30 
conformance document, 307, 308 
error checking, 31-34 
realtime scheduling options, 173 
signal mechanisms, 40-41, 81-82 
types and interfaces, 30-31 
POSIX 1003.1 (ISO/IEC 9945-1:1996), 
29-30 
POSIX 1003.1-1990, 31, 209 
POSIX 1003.1b-1993 (realtime) 
and condition variables, 3.94, 80 
and semaphores, 236-237, 345 
and signals, 230-232 
thread concepts, 29-30 
void *, use of, 311 
POSIX 1003.1c-1995 (threads) 
and cancellation, 154 
cancellation, interfaces, 323-325 
condition variables, interfaces, 
319-322 
error detection and reporting, 310-311 
fork handlers, interfaces, 336 
interfaces, overview, 309-310 
limits, 308-309 
mutexes, interfaces, 316-319 
options, 307-308 
and realtime scheduling, 173 
realtime scheduling, interfaces, 
326-335 
semaphores, interfaces, 345-346 
signals, interfaces, 342-345 
stdio, interfaces, 336-338 
thread concepts, 29-30 
threads, interfaces, 311-316 
thread-safe, interfaces, 338-342 
thread-specific data, interfaces, 
325-326 
void *, use of, 311 
POSIX 1003. li-1995 (corrections to 
1003.1b-1993), 29-30 
POSIX 1003.1J (additional realtime 
extension) 
barriers, 249, 356-358 
read/write locks, 358 
spinlocks, 359 
thread abort, 361 
wait clock, condition variable, 
359-361 
POSIX 1003.14 (multiprocessor profile), 
30, 182, 361-362 
POSIX_PRIOJNHERIT, 186 
POSIX_PRIO_NONE (value), 186 
POSIX_PRIO_PROTECT, 186 
_POSIX_REALTIME_SIGNALS (option), 
228 
_POSIX_SEMAPHORES (option), 235 
_POSIX_THREAD_ATTR_STACKADDR 
(option), 139, 308, 348 
JPOSIX_THREAD_ATTR_STACKSIZE 
(option), 139, 308, 348 
_POSrX_THREAD_PRIO_INHERIT 
(option), 185-186, 308, 349 
_POSIX_THREAD_PRIO_PROTECT 
(option), 185-186, 308, 349 
_POSIX_THREAD_PRIORTTY_SCHEDUL- 
ING (option), 173-176, 179, 308, 
349 
_POSIX_THREAD_PROCESS_SHARED 
(option), 136-137, 308, 348 
374 
Index 
_POSIX_THREADS (option), 308, 348 
_POSIX_THREAD_SAFE_FUNCTIONS 
(option), 308, 349 
_POSIX_TIMERS (option), 360 
pread (function), 354！355 
Predicates 
definition of, 46 
loose, 80 
wakeup, 80-81 
waking waiters, 81 
See also Condition variables 
printf (function), 15 
prioceiling (attribute), 135-138 
Priority ceiling, 186-187, 300 
Priority inheritance 
definition of, 186 
mutexes, 188 
and POSIX 1003.1c options, 307 
priority inversion, avoidance of, 300 
Priority inversions 
avoidance of, 299-300 
as a cost of threading, 26-27 
mutexes and priority scheduling, 63 
as a realtime scheduling problem, 184 
See also Deadlocks 
Process contention, 181-185 
Process exit, 204 
Processes 
asynchronous, 8 
lightweight, 1 
threads, compared to, 10, 20 
variable weight, 1 
Processors 
and blocked threads, 42 
and thread implementation, 190-195 
See also Multiprocessors; 
Uniprocessors 
Programs, examples of 
barriers, 245-248, 250-253 
cancellation, 145-161 
client server, 121-129 
condition variables, creating and 
destroying, 74-76 
condition variables, timed condition 
wait, 83-88 
condition variables, waiting on, 78-80 
creating and using threads, 38-39 
errors, 32-34 
flockfile, 205-207 
fork handlers, 201-203 
initialization, 133-134 
multiple processes, 15-16 
multiple threads, 17-19 
mutex attributes object, 136 
mutexes, deadlock avoidance, 66-69 
mutexes, dynamic, 50-68 
mutexes, locking and unlocking, 
52-57 
mutexes, non-blocking locks, 58-61 
mutexes, static mutex, 50 
pipeline, 99-105 
putchar, 208-209 
read/write locks, 255-269 
realtime scheduling, 175-181 
sample information, 13 
semaphore, 238-240 
SIGEV_THREAD, 232-234 
sigwait, 228-230 
suspend and resume, 218-227 
synchronous programming, 13-15, 27 
thread attributes, 140-141 
thread inertia, 292 
thread-specific, 164-165, 169-172 
user and terminal identification, 211 
work crews, 108-120 
work queue manager, 271-283 
protocol (attribute), 135-138, 186 
pshared (attribute), 135-138, 204 
pthread_abort (function), 361 
pthread_atfork (function), 199, 336 
pthread_attr_destroy (function), 312 
pthread_attr_getdetachstate (function), 
312 
pthread_attr_getguardsize (function), 
353 
pthread_attr_getinheritsched (function), 
327 
pthread_attr_getschedparam (function), 
327 
pthread_attr_getschedpolicy (function), 
327-328 
pthread_attr_getscope (function), 328 
pthread_attr_getstackaddr (function), 
312-313 
pthread_attr_getstacksize (function), 
135, 139,313 
pthread_attr_init (function), 139, 313 
Index 
375 
pthread_attr_setdetachstate (function), 
313 
pthread_attr_setguardsize (function), 
354 
pthread_attr_setinheritsched (function), 
176, 329 
pthread_attr_setschedparam (function), 
175, 329 
pthread_attr_setschedpolicy (function), 
175, 329-330 
pthread_attr_setscope (function), 182, 
330 
pthread_attr_setstackaddr (function), 
314 
pthread_attr_setstacksize (function), 
135,314 
pthread_attr_t (datatype), 135, 139, 231 
pthread_cancel (function) 
asynchronous cancelability, 151 
deferred cancelability, 148 
definition of, 323 
and pthreadjdll, 217 
termination, 43, 143-145 
PTHREAD_CANCEL_ASYNCHRONOUS 
(value), 152, 324 
PTHREAD_CANCEL_DEFERRED 
(value), 145, 147, 324 
PTHREAD_CANCEL_DISABLE (value), 
145,149,324 
PTHREAD_CANCELED (value), 43, 145 
PTHREAD_CANCEL_ENABLE (value), 
147, 324 
pthread_cleanup_pop (function), 43, 
147, 155, 323 
pthread_cleanup_push (function), 43, 
147, 155, 323 
pthread_condattr_destroy (function), 
319 
pthread_condattr_getclock (function), 
360 
pthread_condattr_getpshared (function), 
320 
pthread_condattr_init (function), 137, 
320 
pthread_condattr_setclock (function), 
360 
pthread_condattr_setpshared (function), 
137, 320 
pthread_condattr_t (datatype), 135 
pthread_cond_broadcast (function) ,81, 
256, 300, 321 
pthread_cond_destroy (function), 76, 
321 
pthread_cond_init (function), 75, 137, 
321 
pthread_cond_signal (function), 81, 300, 
322 
pthread_cond_t (datatype), 74, 137 
pthread_cond_timedwait (function), 78, 
80,322 
pthread_cond_wait (function), 77, 85, 
322 
pthread_create (function) 
and attributes objects, 139 
creating and using threads, 36-42, 
189 
definition of, 314 
execution context, 30 
and memory visibility, 89 
and multiple threads, 17 
and thread identifier, 144-145, 266 
PTHREAD_CREATE_DETACHED 
(value), 44, 125, 139, 231, 312-313 
PTHREAD_CREATE_JOINABLE (value), 
139, 231,312-313 
PTHREAD_DESTRUCTORJTERATIONS 
(limit), 168, 309 
pthread_detach (function) 
cleaning up, 158 
creating and using threads, 37 
definition of, 315 
and multiple threads, 17 
termination, 43-44 
pthread_equal (function), 36, 315 
pthread_exit (function) 
and attributes objects, 140 
cleaning up, 155 
creating and using threads, 37-38 
definition of, 204, 315 
and fork, 197 
and memory visibility, 89 
and multiple threads, 17 
termination, 30, 40-44, 53 
PTHREADJEXPLICITJSCHED (value), 
176, 327-329 
pthread_getconcurrency (function), 352 
376 
Index 
pthread_getschedparam (function), 331 
pthread_getspeciflc (function), 34, 164, 
166, 325 
pthread.h (header file), 13 
PTHREADJNHERIT_SCHED (value), 
176, 327-329 
pthreadjoin (function) 
and attributes objects, 139 
cleaning up, 158 
creating and using threads, 37-38 
definition of, 315 
and error checking, 32 
and memory visibility, 89 
and pthread_kill, 225 
termination, 43-44, 128, 145 
pthread_key_create (function), 163-166, 
325-326 
pthread_key_delete (function), 166, 326 
PTHREAD_KEYS_MAX (limit), 166, 309 
pthread_key_t (datatype), 163-166 
pthread_kill (function), 217-227, 343 
pthread_mutexattr_destroy (function), 
316 
pthread_mutexattr_getprioceiling (func- 
tion), 332 
pthread_mutexattr_getprotocol (func- 
tion), 332-333 
pthread_mutexattr_getpshared (func- 
tion), 317 
pthread_mutexattr_gettype (function), 
350-351 
pthread_mutexattr_init (function), 135, 
317 
pthread_mutexattr_setprioceiling (func- 
tion), 333 
pthread_mutexattr_setprotocol (func- 
tion), 186, 333-334 
pthread_mutexattr_setpshared (func- 
tion), 136,317 
pthread_mutexattr_settype (function), 
351 
pthread_mutexattr_t (datatype), 135 
FTHREAD_MUTEX_DEFAULT (value), 
349-351 
pthread_mutex_destroy (function), 51, 
318,350 
PTHREAD_MUTEX_ERRORCHECK 
(value), 349 
pthread_mutex_getprioceiling (func- 
tion), 331 
pthread_mutex_init (function) 
and attributes objects, 135 
creating and destroying mutexes, 
50-51 
definition of, 318 
initialization of, 132, 186 
standardization, future, 350 
PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER 
(macro), 50-52, 74-76 
pthread_mutex_lock (function) 
asynchronous cancelability, 151 
definition of, 318 
lock hierarchy, 64-65 
locking and unlocking, 52, 58 
and memory visibility, 90, 93 
mutexes, number of, 303-304 
standardization, future, 350 
XSHS mutex types, 350 
PTHREAD_MUTEX_NORMAL (value), 
349 
PTHREAD_MUTEX_RECURSIVE (value), 
349 
pthread_mutex_setprioceiling (func- 
tion), 332 
pthread_mutex_t (datatype), 49, 62, 136 
pthread_mutex_trylock (function) 
creating and destroying mutexes, 49 
definition of, 319 
and flockfile and funlockfile, 207 
lock hierarchy, 64-65 
locking and unlocking, 52, 58 
mutexes, number of, 303-304 
read/write locks, 257 
standardization, future, 350 
XSHS mutex types, 350 
pthread_mutex_unlock (function) 
creating and destroying mutexes, 49 
definition of, 319 
and flockfile and funlockfile, 207 
lock hierarchy, 64-65 
locking and unlocking, 52, 58 
and memory visibility, 90 
Index 
377 
mutexes, number of, 303-304 
standardization, future, 350 
XSHS mutex types, 350 
pthread_once (function) 
initialization, condition variables, 75 
initialization, mutexes, 50 
or statically initialized mutex, 132 
in suspend/resume, 220-221 
and thread races, 295-296 
thread-specific data, 163-164 
PTHREAD_ONCE_INIT (macro), 132 
pthread_once_t (datatype), 132 
PTHREAD_PRIOJNHERIT (value), 186, 
333-334 
PTHREAD_PRIO_NONE (value), 333-334 
PTHREAD_PRIO_PROTECT (value), 186, 
333-334 
PTHREAD_PROCESS_PRTVATE (value), 
136-137, 317-320 
PTHREAD_PROCESS_SHARED (value), 
136-138, 204, 317-320 
PTHREAD_SCOPE_PROCESS (value), 
182,328-330 
PTHREAD_SCOPE_SYSTEM (value), 
182, 328-330 
pthread_self (function), 17, 36-37, 
144-145, 316 
pthread_setcancelstate (function), 147, 
149, 151, 324 
pthread_setcanceltype (function), 151, 
324 
pthread_setconcurrency (function), 
352-353 
pthread_setschedparam (function), 334 
pthread_setspecific (function), 166, 326 
pthread_sigmask (function), 215-216, 
343 
pthread_spin_lock (function), 359 
PTHREAD_STACK_MIN (limit), 139, 309 
pthread_t (datatype) 
creating and using threads, 36-37, 
189, 266 
and pthread_kill, 217 
termination, 43, 144-145 
thread-specific data, 161-162 
pthread_testcancel (function), 144-145, 
150, 158, 325 
PTHREAD_THREAD_MAX (limit), 309 
putc (function), 207 
putchar (function), 6, 207 
putchar_unlocked (function), 207-209, 
338 
putc_unlocked (function), 207-208, 338 
pwrite (function), 355 
R 
Races 
avoidance of, 26-27 
and condition variables, 73 
and memory visibility, 91 
overview, 293-295 
sequence race, 284-285, 295-297 
synchronization race, 294！296 
thread inertia, 291-293 
raise (function), 217 
Random number generation function, 
213 
rand_r (function), 213, 341 
readdir_r (function) 
definition of, 339 
directory searching, 212 
reentrancy, 7, 297 
thread-safe function, 210 
and work crews, 107-109 
Read/write locks, 242, 253-269, 358 
Read/write ordering, 92-95 
Ready threads, 39-42, 53 
Realtime scheduling 
allocation domain, 181-183 
architectural overview, 30 
contention scope, 181-183 
definition of, 7-8, 172-173 
hard realtime, 172-173 
interfaces, 326-335 
mutexes, priority ceiling, 186-187, 
300 
mutexes, priority inheritance, 
186-188, 300, 307 
mutexes, priority-aware, 185-186 
policies and priorities, 174-181 
POSIX options, 173 
and priority inversion, 299-300, 326 
problems with, 183-185 
soft realtime, 172-173 
and synchronization, 295 
Recursive mutexes, 349-351 
378 
Index 
Recycling threads, 43-44 
Reentrant, 6-7, 297 
See also Readdir_r (function) 
Resume. See Pthread_kill (function) 
Running threads, 42 
Scaling, 20-22 
SC_GETGR_R_SIZE_MAX (value), 214 
SC_GETPW_R_SIZE_MAX (value), 214 
SCHED_BG_NP (value), 175 
SCHED_FG_NP (value), 175 
SCHED_FIFO (value) 
problems with, 183-185 
as a scheduling interface value, 
328-331, 334-335 
scheduling policies and priorities, 
174-175 
and thread race, 295 
sched_get_priority_max (function), 174, 
335 
sched_get_priority_min (function), 174, 
335 
SCHED_OTHER (value), 175,328-331, 
334-335 
schedparam (attribute), 138-141, 175 
schedpolicy (attribute), 138-141, 175 
SCHED_RR (value), 174, 185, 328-331, 
334-335 
Scheduler Activations model, 194 
Scheduling. See Realtime scheduling 
schedjrield (function), 53-54, 65, 221, 
316 
Schimmel, Curt, 94 
scope (attribute), 138-141, 182 
_SC_THREAD_ATTR_STACKADDR 
(option), 308 
_SC_THREAD_ATTR_STACKSIZE 
(option), 308 
_SC_THREAD_DESTRUCTOR_ITERA- 
TIONS (limit), 309 
_SC_THREAD_KEYS_MAX (limit), 309 
_SC_THREAD_PRIO_INHERIT (option), 
185, 308 
_SC_THREAD_PRIO_PROTECT (option), 
185-186, 308 
_SC_THREAD_PRIORITY_SCHEDULING 
(option), 308 
_SC_THREAD_PROCESS_SHARED 
(option), 308 
_SC_THREADS (limit), 308 
_SC_THREAD_SAFE_FUNCTIONS 
(option), 308 
_SC_THREAD_STACK_MIN (limit), 309 
_SC_THREAD_THREADS_MAX (limit), 
309 
Semaphores 
functions, definition of, 345-346 
as a synchronization mechanism, 8, 
30 
synchronization with signal catching, 
234-240 
sem_destroy (function), 237, 345 
sem_getvalue (function), 237 
sem_init (function), 237, 345 
sem_post (function), 235-237, 346 
sem_t (value), 237 
semjxywait (function), 237, 346 
sem_wait (function), 236-237, 346 
Sequence races, 284-285, 295-297 
Serial programming, 25 
Serial regions. See Predicates 
Serialization, 21 
Shared data, 3 
sigaction (function), 215 
SIG_BLOCK (value), 343 
SIGCONT (action), 217 
sigevent, 311 
sigev_notify_attributes, 231 
sigev_notify_function, 231 
SIGEV_THREAD (function), 40, 231-234 
sigevjvalue (function), 311 
SIGFPE (function), 215-216 
SIGKILL (function), 216-217 
Signals 
actions, 215-216 
background, 214-215 
and condition variables, 72-76, 
80-81 
handlers, 91-92 
interfaces, 342-345 
masks, 216 
and memory visibility, 89 
pthread_kill, 217-227 
running and blocking threads, 42 
semaphores, 234-240 
Index 
379 
SIGEV^THREAD, 231-234 
sigwait, 227-230 
See also Condition variables 
SIGPIPE (action), 215 
sigprocmask (function), 216 
sigqueue (function), 230 
SIGSEGV (action), 216 
SIG_SETMASK (value), 343 
SIGSTOP (action), 216-217 
sigtimedwait (function), 228, 343-344 
SIGTRAP signal, 216, 290 
SIGJJNBLOCK (value), 343 
sigwait (function) 
definition of, 227-230, 344 
running and blocking, 42 
and semaphores, 234 
sigwaitinfo (function), 228, 234, 344-345 
SIMD (single instruction, multiple data), 
106 
sleep (function), 15 
SMP. See Multiprocessors 
Soft realtime, 172-173 
Solaris 2.5 
concurrency level, setting of, 58, 119, 
128, 145, 152, 266 
thread debugging library, 290 
programming examples, introduction 
to, 12-13 
realtime scheduling, 176, 179 
SIGEVJTHREAD implementation, 231 
Spinlocks. 359 
Spurious wakeups, 80-81 
stackaddr (attribute), 138-141 
stacksize (attribute), 138-141 
Startup threads, 41-42 
stderr, 33 
stdin (function) 
in asynchronous program example, 
14, 18 
and client servers, 121 
in pipeline program example, 98, 105 
and stdio, 205-207 
stdio (function) 
and concurrency, 23 
and fork handlers, 199 
interfaces, 336-338 
and realtime scheduling. 190 
thread-safety. 6. 205-207 
stdout (function) 
and client servers, 121 
in pipeline program example, 98 
and stdio, 205 
in suspend program example, 224 
strerror (function), 33 
String token function, 212 
strtok_r (function), 212, 339 
struct aiocb, 230 
struct dirent, 109, 210 
struct sigevent, 230 
Suspend. See Pthread_kill (function) 
Synchronization 
architectural overview, 30 
and computing overhead, 26 
critical sections, 46 
definition of, 7-8 
objects, 3 
and programming model, 24！25 
protocols, 26 
races, 284-285 
and reentrant code, 6-7 
and scheduling, 295 
and semaphores, 234-240 
and sequence race, 294-297 
and UNIX, 9-11 
See also Barriers; Condition variables; 
Invariants; Memory, visibility; 
Mutexes; Parallelism; Read/write 
locks 
Synchronous 
I/O operations, 22-23 
programming, 13-15, 27 
sysconf (function), 185, 214, 307-308 
System contention, 181-185 
Termination of threads, 43-44 
thd_continue (interface), 217, 223-224 
thd_suspend (interface), 217-221, 224 
Threads 
abort (POSIX 1003.1J), 361 
architectural overview, 30 
and asynchronous programming, 
8-12 
attributes, 138-141 
benefits of, 10-11, 20-25 
blocking, 42 
380 
Index 
Threads (continued) 
candidates for, 28-29 
client server programming model, 
120-129 
costs of, 25-28 
creating and using, 25-41 
definition of, 8 
error checking, 31-34 
identifier, 36 
implementation of, 189 
initial (main), 36-42, 119, 131-134 
interfaces, 311-316 
introduction to, 1-3 
many to few (two level), 193-195 
many to one (user level), 190-191 
one to one (kernel level), 191-193 
as part of a process, 10 
pipeline programming model, 97-105 
processes, compared to, 10, 20 
programmers, compared to, 3 
programming model, 24-25 
ready, 39-42, 53 
recycling, 43-44 
running, 42 
startup, 41-42 
states of, 39-41 
termination, 43-44 
and traditional programming, 4, 27 
types and interfaces, 30-31 
work crew programming model, 
105-120 
See also Concurrency; Debugging, 
threads 
Thread-safe 
definition of, 6-7 
interfaces, 286-287, 338-342 
libraries, 283-285 
library, 303-304 
and mutexes, 62 
and programming discipline, 26-27 
Thread-safe functions 
directory searching, 212 
group and user database, 213-214 
random number generation, 213 
string token, 212 
time representation, 212-213 
user and terminal identification, 
209-211 
Thread-specific data 
creating, 163-166 
destructor functions, 167-172 
interfaces, 325-326 
overview, 161-163 
and termination, 43 
and thread-safety, 6-7 
use of, 166-167 
thr_setconcurrency (function), 13, 58, 
119, 128, 145, 152 
Time representation function, 212-213 
Timer signals, 23 
timer_create (function), 230 
Timeslice, 8, 42, 174 
Tokens, 3, 47 
tty_name_r (function), 210 
U 
Uniprocessors 
and allocation domain, 182 
and concurrency, 4！5 
and deadlock, 65 
definition of, 5 
and thread inertia, 291-293 
and thread race, 293-297 
unistd.h (header file), 307 
University of Washington, 194 
UNIX 
and asynchronous, 9-11, 22 
and error checking, 31-34 
kernel, 154 
programming examples, introduction 
to, 12-13 
UNIX Systems for Modern Architectures, 
94 
UNIX98. SeeXSH5 
User and terminal identification func- 
tion, 210-211 
Variable weight processes, 1 
void* 
creating and using threads, 36 
definition of, 311 
thread startup, 42 
thread termination, 43 
Index 
381 
W 
waitpid (function), 15, 19 
WNOHANG (flag), 15 
Word tearing, 95 
Work crews. 105-120, 270-283 
Work queue. See Work crews 
X Windows. 28 
X/Open. Sct'XSH5 
X/Open CAE Specification, System Inter- 
faces and Headers, Issue 5. See 
XSH5 
XSH5 
cancellation points, 148, 355-356 
concurrency level, 351-353 
mutex error detection and reporting, 
311 
mutex types, 349-351 
parallel I/O, 354-355 
POSIX options for, 348-349 
stack guard size, 353-354 
